

1. Sim6n Bolivar and Luis L6pez Mendez to the 

Marquess of Wellesley 1 

[Copy ] 2 

London, July 21, 1810. 

The commissioners of the supreme junta of Venezuela offer their 
respects to His Excellency the Marquess of Wellesley and have the 
honor to inform him, in view of what His Excellency so kindly 
suggested in his conference of Thursday last, of the views of their 
government respecting the mission entrusted to them. 

The first duty of the commissioners is to entreat His Excellency 
to convey their profound and respectful gratitude for the gracious 
reception which His Britannic Majesty has condescended to give to 
the aims and hopes of the people and government of Venezuela. 

Informed of the principles which have animated the political trans- 
formation of those provinces and the spirit which inspires the su- 
preme junta , His Excellency cannot but see therein the best guarantee 
of the earnest intent of the peoples of Venezuela to maintain their 
relations of amity, commerce, and friendly intercourse with the 
subjects of His Britannic Majesty. 

The solemn declarations of the Venezuelan government include, 
moreover, the assurance that, far from desiring to sever the ties that 
have bound her to the mother country, Venezuela has sought only 
to place herself in a position to obviate the dangers that threaten her. 
Although independent of the Council of the Regency, Venezuela 
neither regards herself as less faithful to her Monarch nor less con- 
cerned with the favorable outcome of Spains holy struggle. 3 

The position of Venezuela thus having been made clear, her in- 
terests and the purpose of this mission stand open to view: 

1. Venezuela, as an integral part of the Spanish Empire, finds her- 
self threatened by France and desires to rest her security upon the 

1 Richard Wellesley, Secretary for Foreign Affairs (ed.). 

2 See p. xxxi. 

8 A Council of Regents was directing Spain’s forces against the armies of 
Napoleon, which had invaded Spain in 1808 (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


4 

naval protection of England. The government of Venezuela also 
desires that, through the efforts of the government of His Britannic 
Majesty, she be afforded suitable means to defend the rights of her 
legitimate sovereign and to perfect her measures of security against 
the common enemy. 

2. Venezuela’s decision might prove to be a source of unpleasant 
misunderstanding with those provinces that may have recognized the 
Regency, and this central government will, perhaps, endeavor to 
attack her directly or to disturb her domestic peace by promoting 
dangerous factions. The inhabitants of Venezuela solicit the good 
offices of His Britannic Majesty in order to remain at peace and in 
friendship with their brothers in both hemispheres. 

3. As the maintenance of relations of friendship, commerce, and 
interchange of assistance between the provinces of Venezuela and 
the mother country requires certain agreements between the respec- 
tive governments, the government of Venezuela would conform to 
them with the utmost confidence if arranged and guaranteed by His 
Britannic Majesty. 

4. Further, it would be important and in accord, moreover, with 
the desires of the junta of Venezuela if the government of His 
Britannic Majesty would issue instructions to the heads of his fleet 
and of his colonies in the Antilles, ordering them to favor, insofar as 
possible, the proposed objectives and, in particular, the commercial 
relations between the inhabitants of Venezuela and the subjects of 
His Britannic Majesty, who will benefit by our commerce as a most 
favored nation. 

The commissioners do not wish to conclude this statement without 
assuring His Excellency the Marquess of Wellesley that their high 
regard of him will correspond in all events to that measure of frank- 
ness and friendliness with which His Excellency has always honored 
them. 

Sim6n Bolivar 
Luis L6pez Mendez 



A Lesson by Andres Bello 















1811 


2. Address to the Patriotic Society of Caracas 
[Blanco y Azpunia, III, 138] 

Caracas, July 4, 1811. 

The question is not whether or not there are two congresses. How 
can those who are most keenly aware of the need for union promote 
division? What we desire is that the union be effective, so that it may 
give us life in the glorious struggle to achieve our freedom. To unite 
and do nothing, to sleep in the arms of apathy, was yesterday but a 
disgrace-while today it is treason. The National Congress is arguing 
issues that should long since have been settled. And what is being 
said? That we must begin with a confederation, as though we were 
not already confederated against foreign tyranny, and that we should 
await the outcome of Spanish policy. What does it matter to us 
whether Spain sells her slaves to Bonaparte or retains them, if we 
are determined to be free? These doubts are themselves the sad con- 
sequence of our ancient fetters. It is also said that great enterprises 
should be planned over a period of time. Three hundred years— is 
that not time enough? The Patriot junta respects, as it must, the 
Congress of the nation, but the Congress must hear the Patriot 
junta , for it is the center of inspiration and the headquarters of all 
sincere revolutionists. Let us fearlessly lay the cornerstone of South 
American liberty; if we hesitate we are lost. 

I propose that a committee, representing this body, convey these 
sentiments to the Sovereign Congress. 


Sim6n Bolivar 


6 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


3. Francisco de Miranda to [Jos£ de Sata y Bussy], 

Secretary of War 

[journal de V Empire (Paris), November 20, 1811] 

Guacara, July 24, 1811. 

On the twenty-first of the present month, two days after leaving 
Caracas, I arrived at Maracay, where a military hospital was estab- 
lished. Here, further measures were taken for attacking Valencia, 
whose garrison, the day before, had sustained a light action with the 
advance guard of our army, which, under the command of General 
Marques del Toro, continued its march toward Guacara. The next 
day, I received two envoys from the Spanish government of Valencia, 
who proposed, in a vague manner, terms of reconciliation. I took 
this opportunity to give them the pastoral letter of His Reverence 
the Archbishop, together with the admonitions of the Prelate of San 
Francisco, as we believed that these writings would produce the most 
desirable effect. On the same day, I had the army march forward to 
take up its planned position at Guacara, where we arrived without 
opposition on the 22d. On that day I received, from Valencia, a new 
delegation bringing documents number two and three, which re- 
peated the same thoughts and contained a proposal for capitulation, 
the tenor of which, with my reply, will be found in number four. 
That night we received the answer brought by the chief envoy, 
Pedro Penalver, which, in substance, begged us to have the army 
approach that city, since the authorities were being hard-pressed by 
the local Europeans 1 and <pardos 2 who were opposed to all measures 
not in conformity with their own ideas respecting rule and opposition 
to Caracas. At dawn, on the 23d, the army proceeded toward Valen- 
cia, and we issued our first warning to its inhabitants. They replied 
evasively on all points; meanwhile, we waited for the return of our 
aide-de-camp, Captain Pedro Aymerich, before commencing any 
hostilities, contenting ourselves with reconnoitering the headland 
before Valencia, where the enemy was entrenched in considerable 
strength, including four pieces of artillery. The enemy unexpectedly 
opened rifle and cannon fire upon our light troops which were wait- 
ing at a short distance; hence, the position in question was im- 
mediately attacked. We took it in short order with slight losses, al- 


1 Spaniards, a term also used frequently by Bolivar (ed.). 

* Local name for persons of color (ed.)* * 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


though the enemy had been utterly confident of holding it as a 
position of the first importance. 

Here we found the artillery and ammunition that the enemy had 
abandoned in his precipitous and disorderly retreat toward the city, 
and we took a number of prisoners. Our troops, encouraged by this 
brilliant success, hody pursued them toward the city, capturing 
Melchor de Somarriba, who, it seems, had commanded these troops 
in the defense of the headland. As our men were in vigorous pursuit, 
the enemy took refuge within the town, where fighting began anew. 
Here, some of their number, using artillery and firearms, had already 
set up the defense of the main plaza. Nevertheless, we attacked them 
at two different points and, in very little time and almost without 
loss to ourselves, took possession of the plaza and of the artillery 
which was defending it— a creditable and brilliant feat for the 
Venezuelan troops. Although we were victorious and had reached 
the heart of the city, we learned that none of the inhabitants were 
joining us, even though the day before we had learned, not only 
from over forty soldiers who had deserted to us but also from the 
emissaries who had come to offer us terms, that all the white forces 
were disposed to join us as soon as we entered the city, which could 
not have resisted in any case for more than one hour owing to a lack 
of ammunition. 

In these circumstances we decided that Brigadier Fernando del 
Toro and Colonel Sim6n Bolivar, with a body of infantry, cavalry, 
and artillery, should attack two points— the quarters of the jpardos and 
the convent of San Francisco— where the enemy had repaired and 
where there was some real resistance. During this assault, the 
enemy did considerable damage to those attacking from the street, 
as he was defending himself inside these buildings and thus was out 
of reach. Brigadier Fernando del Toro, his horse having been slain, 
was seriously wounded, as were Jos6 Lazo, the commander of the 
cavalry, and Gabriel Ponte, and virtually all the officers and soldiers 
serving in the artillery. 

Upon the request of some of the inhabitants, an armistice was 
proposed to the enemy in order to discuss a capitulation based on the 
terms that had been previously suggested. To this end we sent the 
priest, the only one among them who had come forward in our favor, 
with proposal number seven; but the reply was so insulting that we 
saw fit to disregard it as incompatible with the honor of Venezuelan 
arms, which every one of us is anxious to maintain. For this reason, 
and by agreement with the principal leaders who were there, it was 


8 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


decided to withdraw the army after first spiking and rendering useless 
the artillery we had taken from the enemy and committing our 
wounded, provisions, and munitions of war to the General Head- 
quarters at Guacara, from which, that morning, we had set out to 
effect the reconciliation of the unfortunate city of Valencia. This 
movement, considering the circumstances, was carried out in an 
orderly fashion without harassment by the enemy. It is hoped that, 
once the general excitement and commotion now prevailing in Valen- 
cia have subsided, the army, strengthened by the reinforcements that 
have left Caracas and are daily expected, will be able to suppress or 
correct the excesses and the civil discord that our perfidious enemies 
have sown and continue to foment in that city, to the ruination of its 
inhabitants and the impairment of our newborn freedom. Our losses 
in men were not considerable, but they were heavy among the prin- 
cipal leaders, such as Fernando del Toro, cavalry commanders Lazo 
and Ponte; artillery commander Pinero, infantry captain Pedro 
Garcia; my aide-de-camp Francisco Salias, a youthful and excellent 
citizen; the aides-de-camp Manuel Cortes and Tomas Montilla; artil- 
lery cadet Jose Chipia, and infantry captain Pedro Aymerich, to- 
gether with all the others included in the attached list. This precious 
blood, spilled for the most sacred of causes, is of concern to all men 
who would have the good will of their country. We cannot accurately 
estimate the casualties of the enemy, but they must be considerable. 
We have in our hands, as prisoners, the leaders, Melchor de Somar- 
riba, Clemente Britapaja, Jose Antonio Guevara, and others. 

I would be remiss in my duty if I did not mention other officers 
who, while they did not shed their blood, offered it no less than the 
others for the glory of their country. They are, namely: Brigadier 
Marques del Toro, second in command of the army; Colonel Luis 
Santineli, Lieutenant Colonel Florencio Palacios, Colonel Simon 
Bolivar, and Lieutenant Colonel Pedro Arevalo. To Captain Antonio 
Flores and pardos Captain Comelio Mota, I have offered, in the 
name of our country, the rank of lieutenant colonel in recognition 
of their exceptional valor and distinguished services. So that the 
government may have an immediate account of yesterdays events, 
we have arranged to have these dispatches carried by aide-de-camp 
Mariano Montilla, whose zeal, energy, and talents yesterday were 
outstanding. Fernando Penalver, the deputy, whose advice and serv- 
ices to the army, in the attack and operations against Valencia, do 
him no less honor than his patriotic efforts on behalf of our liberty, 
also is departing. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


9 

May God preserve you for many years. The General Headquarters 
of Guacara, July 24, 1811. 

Francisco de Miranda 

P.S. Part of the reinforcements has just arrived and, also, the exe- 
crable Arrillaga, one of the principal leaders of the Valencia conspira- 
tors whom the detachment had the good fortune to take prisoner on 
the way. 


4. Francisco de Miranda to [Jose de Sata y Bussy], 

Secretary of War 

[Journal de VEmpire (Paris), November 20, 1811] 1 

General Headquarters, Valencia, August 13, 1811. 

Believing that the measures we had taken for the blockade and 
surrender of Valencia were more than adequate to achieve the desired 
result, we ordered a general and simultaneous attack by all the 
troops, who had been brought together for this purpose from different 
regions of this province. 

This attack, which began yesterday at two o’clock in the afternoon 
at eight different points, forced the attention of the enemy on all 
sides, making his defense less effective. The attack lasted, however, 
until nightfall, with our troops reducing the enemy, who stubbornly 
defended his entrenchments in the main square. We held our posi- 
tions until daybreak, and our troops got no rest during the night. 

The attack began anew in the same order at dawn but with such 
renewed vigor at certain points that by ten o’clock the enemy (whose 
water supply we had previously cut off) proposed terms of capitula- 
tion. These were rejected pending surrender of their arms, as we had 
previously experienced a violation of a formal capitulation; they had 
to submit to this point, leaving to our discretion the humaneness and 

1 This and the preceding letter are included because of their mention of 
Bolivar's activities. With the exception of Doc. 2, no writings of Bolivar for 
the year 1811 have been found (ed.). 


10 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


generosity of the terms on which I had proposed to deal with them. 
Our troops had control of the square, the arms, and the artillery by 
twelve o'clock noon, at which hour we took possession and hoisted the 
Venezuelan flag. 

The flotilla, consisting of from four to six small armed vessels 
which infested the lagoon of Valencia and its environs, also sur- 
rendered to the arms of Venezuela yesterday at four in the afternoon, 
following brief negotiations, and similarly turned over to us its 
artillery, arms, vessels, and other munitions and instruments of war. 

Thus, all the people and towns that I found in opposition to and 
at war with Caracas, when I arrived in these parts on July 21 last, are 
now defeated or pacified. 

In a subsequent report, which I will forward tomorrow, I shall 
enumerate the small number of dead and wounded we have suffered 
in this vigorous action, wherein our troops achieved fame and mili- 
tary glory. 

Both Colonel Sim6n Bolivar, who, like his companions in these 
patriotic endeavors, has distinguished himself in his various assign- 
ments, and my aide-de-camp, Captain Francisco Salias, who is re- 
stored to his country after a harsh imprisonment, will inform you of 
certain other particulars which lack of time does not permit me to 
include at the moment. 

May God preserve you for many years. 


Francisco de Miranda 












I 






1812 


5. To General Francisco de Miranda 
[Copy] 

Caracas, July 12, 1812. 

My General: 

Having exhausted all my physical and moral strength, where shall 
I find courage to take up my pen and write you now that the strong- 
hold of Puerto Cabello has fallen out of my hands? Because of this 
action, my spirit is crushed much more than that of the province. 
The latter has the hope of seeing the rebirth of its salvation and 
liberty from the remnants still left us, for it is evident that those 
people are the most devoted to the country’s cause and the most op- 
posed to Spanish tyranny. Notwithstanding the cowardice with which 
the inhabitants of that city acted in the end, I am certain that they 
have not ceased to entertain these same sentiments. They thought 
our cause was lost because our army was nowhere near them. The 
enemy has gained very little from the rifles we had there, since most 
of them were cast into the thickets by the soldiers who carried them, 
while the remainder were quite unserviceable. In short, I believe the 
enemy will get scarcely two hundred in all. 

I trust that you will be kind enough to tell me what is to become of 
the officers who have come with me; they are extremely fine men, and 
in my opinion there are none better in Venezuela. The loss of 
Colonel Jal6n is an irreparable one; he is worth an entire army. 

General, my spirits are so depressed that I do not feel that I have 
the courage to command a single soldier. My vanity forced me to 
believe that my desire to succeed and my burning zeal for my country 
would serve to replace the talents which I lacked as a commander. I 
therefore beg you, either place me under the orders of an officer of the 
lowest rank, or grant me several days to compose myself and to recover 
the confidence that I lost in losing Puerto Cabello. To this should 
be added the state of my physical health, for, after thirteen sleepless 
nights and extreme distress, I find myself almost in a state of [mental] 
collapse. I shall commence at once the detailed report of the opera- 


12 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


tdons of the troops which I commanded and the misfortunes which 
destroyed the city of Puerto Cabello, in order to justify your selection 
of me and to clear my honor in the opinion of the public. I did my 
duty, General, and had but a single soldier stayed, I would have 
fought the enemy; but they abandoned me through no fault of mine. 
I did everything in my power to hold them and oblige them to save 
their country; but (ah!), alas, the country has been lost at my hands. 

Sim6n Bolivar 


6. To Francisco Iturbe, Resident of Caracas 1 
[Copy] 

Curasao, September 10, 1812. 

My dear friend and Master: 

I managed to arrive here a week ago after endless trials and tribula- 
tions, bad sailing, worse shipping, and a miserable reception. I say a 
miserable reception because no sooner had I arrived than my luggage 
was confiscated for two very strange reasons: first, because my baggage 
and effects were in the same house as those of Miranda; and second, 
because the vessel, El Celozo, had contracted debts in Puerto Cabello, 
which I must now defray, inasmuch as I was commandant of that city 
when they were contracted. This is the exact truth. In consequence, 
I find myself entirely without the means to maintain my life, which 
I am now beginning to regard with the greatest disgust and even 
horror. 

Although my situation is as miserable as I describe it, some friends 
remain who treat me with sincerity and consideration; and yet, I 
believe that, if it comes to lending me money or rendering me a simi- 
lar service, I fear, I repeat, that I will derive no benefits from them 
but will lose their friendship instead. For there are no other friends 
like you in this world, and, when Providence does bestow them, it is 
but to remove them again, as has happened to me. 


1 A close friend and benefactor of Bolivar, who secured his release from the 
Spanish following the capitulation of Miranda (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


13 

I beg you not to forget to take the best possible care of my 
affairs. If, perchance, my friend Domingo Ascanio has already left 
or no longer manages my properties, I sincerely implore you to secure 
funds by some means or other and send them to me, taking every 
possible precaution; for who knows what further plot may be 
hatched to deprive me of whatever I should receive? Although I 
have nothing to do with Miranda or the old government, I am pay- 
ing their debts and even their credits. Patience! 

Kindly write to me in care of some friend, so that my letters may 
not be lost. 

Tell me everything, good or bad, that occurs to you. Call upon 
me for anything you may need and which I may be able to do for 
a friend so worthy of the highest esteem and sincerest gratitude. 
There are no two friends like Iturbe. 

Farewell, until the next occasion. 

Sim6n BolIvar 

P.S. If any malicious reports should reach Caracas respecting my 
political conduct or my methods, you may deny them, assured that 
they are false. I say this in warning not because I imagine it may 
happen but because I understand that there are many hereabouts 
who, ill-disposed toward the sons of Caracas, are desirous of currying 
favor with the [Spanish] government by tale-bearing. 


7. To Francisco Iturbe, Resident of Caracas 
[Original] 

Curasao, September 19, 1812. 

My dearest friend: 

I have heard from one of our friends who has arrived from the 
Costa Firme 1 that Domingo Ascanio must leave for the Canary 
Islands. Consequently, it is essential that you do me the favor of 
telling Ascanio to assign the power of attorney, which I gave him 
before coming here, to the person that you shall judge best fitted to 


1 The northern or Caribbean coastal region of South America (ed.)« 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


14 

administrate my properties. I presume, however, that by now this 
has been done, in keeping with our previous agreement relative to 
this particular. I especially beg you to endeavor to procure the re- 
lease of my brothers properties, which, because of his death, I am 
supposed to inherit; bear in mind that I am ready to make every 
possible sacrifice in order to obtain possession of these properties. 

Moreover, I urge you to tell the person charged with the care 
of my affairs to take pains to have the matter of the Gallegos estate, 
which was left pending, brought up to date; and to rent out my 
houses in the city, the tenants to keep them in repair in lieu of rent. 

In brief, I know perfectly well that you will do by my properties 
as you have done by me. That is, you will protect them as your own, 
or even better, because you place your friends interests above your 
own— which is the least that can be said publicly and privately of the 
most generous of men who does honor to humanity. I am as well off 
here as can be expected considering my present circumstances. It is 
true that they have unjustly deprived me of my little money and 
effects, but in my heart I am resigned because I know that, when 
misfortune pursues one for some time, everything conspires against 
the victim. But, since men of honor and of courage must disregard 
the blows of ill-fortune, I have armed myself with resolution, viewing 
with disdain the blasts that chance rains upon me. Nothing com- 
mands my heart but my conscience. The latter rests easily, and noth- 
ing whatever disturbs it. What does it matter whether or not one has 
the material things of life? Actual necessities are never lacking. No 
man on this earth ever dies of want. A compassionate friend to help 
us is never lacking, and it is no shame to receive aid from a friend. 

Friend Iturbe, you may rely upon the grateful friendship of 
Bolivar. You can be sure that tomorrow is another day and that a 
kindness done today is repaid tomorrow, for God gives virtue its 
reward here on earth. Farewell. 

Your friend, 

BOLIVAR 

P.S. Kindly devise with Juan Jos6 Toro the means for sending me 
something to live on, for I have hardly enough to keep alive until 
the reply to this letter reaches me. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


15 


8. To the Sovereign Congress of New Granada 
[O’Leary, XIII, 57] 

Cartagena, November 27, 1812. 

Distinguished Gentlemen: 

The inauguration of this Sovereign Congress, accomplished at the 
very time of the destruction of the Republic of Venezuela, cannot 
but provide the favorable auspices for the restoration of that un- 
fortunate state. In behalf of the exhausted remnants of Venezuela, 
gathered here in Cartagena, I take the liberty of addressing you. 

The fall of Caracas brought with it that of the entire confederation 
of Venezuela. The extraordinary vicissitudes, physical and political, 
which fatally accumulated about us, broke down its machinery to the 
point of total ruin. 

The terrible earthquake of March 26, as a result of which over 
20,000 persons perished in the capital, cities, and towns, and the gen- 
eral consternation produced by this terrible event were only of sec- 
ondary importance among the causes which led to the annihilation of 
our liberty and independence. Political errors committed by the 
government had a more direct influence on this catastrophe. 

The most important cause was doubtless the failure of the junta, 
in the very first days after its inauguration, to send a naval expedition 
against the city of Coro, as soon as the latter had expressed its de- 
termination not to conform to the new system established by the 
popular will of Venezuela, and its failure to declare Coro to be 
insurgent and to attack it as an enemy. At that time every sensible 
man favored war upon so vile and stubborn a city, which, blind to 
the value of its rights, meant to deprive us of ours through force. The 
junta , however, vaguely guided by false principles of policy, pursued 
a course contrary to that dictated by justice; it advised moderation 
and restraint, even as the seeds of a civil war, which one day would 
result in the collapse of the state, were sprouting. 

The members of our government founded the principles of their 
conduct on the precepts of a poorly understood philanthropy, and 
on the presumptuous belief that, as the cause was a popular one, 
everyone would rally to its support without the use of force, simply 
upon the announcement of its principles. 

The same reasoning is seen in the failure to levy and discipline a 
sufficient number of seasoned troops to render the province and the 
entire confederation safe from invasion; the senseless dissipation of 
the public wealth and taxes for frivolous ends, when they should have 


i6 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


been used in preparation for war; and the failure to maintain at all 
times a reserve for the basic requirements of the state. A stupid 
indulgence of the ingrate and perfidious Spaniards, who, although 
repeatedly surprised in subversive attempts, were not punished for 
their atrocious crimes, constituted an injustice which assuredly 
caused the irreparable damage which again reduced us to slavery. 
And, lastly, there existed a religious fanaticism, which, hypocritically 
directed by the clergy, was bent upon confusing the public spirit 
with its selfish viewpoints and partisan interests, for it was fearful 
of losing its hold upon the superstitious populace. All things con- 
spired at the same time to prepare our chains. 

The time for us to don those fetters was hastened when a few 
turbulent spirits, anxious for control of their cities and provinces, 
proposed in the Federal Congress to divide the province of Caracas 
into small states, which would have further weakened the federal 
government, itself devoid of strength. The lengthy and violent de- 
bates held on this matter inspired in the towns a distrust and hatred 
of Caracas which led to the insurrection of the city of Valencia, one 
of the most important in the province. 

The reconquest of that town did not suffice to quench the flame 
of discord that had been kindled there. On the contrary, both there 
as well as in the smaller cities of the interior, it continued to smolder, 
later to spread with greater fury throughout the country; for, as the 
malcontents and the Europeans maintained direct relations with the 
enemies who were along the borders, they succeeded in corrupting 
an infamous official, a native of the city of Carora, who commanded 
an advance guard. This unit, with the aid of other denaturalized 
sons of the towns along the road, cleared the way for them, until he 
brought them within reach of the valleys and towns of Aragua. 

There the enemy, after four successive actions, was routed com- 
pletely by our army, which was hastily formed in Caracas, since, most 
unfortunately, virtually all the soldiers of the Republic had perished 
[in the earthquake] under the ruins of every city that they had garri- 
soned, in the capital and along the borders. In spite of these victories, 
our army was compelled to surrender its arms, in sacrifice to the plans 
of its general [Miranda], who, with unmatched cowardice, failed to 
seize the advantages of victory by pursuing the enemy. Instead, he 
ignominiously proposed and concluded a capitulation, which, cover- 
ing us with opprobrium, returned us to the yoke of our oppressors. 

These tyrants had scarcely taken possession of the fortified towns 
of Puerto Cabello, Caracas, and La Guaira, when, in open violation 
of the terms of capitulation and the rights of men, they placed in 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


17 

chains all citizens of merit and standing who had distinguished 
themselves in the Republic. With a lust for blood which seems to 
have outdone cruelty itself, they furiously persecuted innocent chil- 
dren and respectable old folk, nor did they spare the fair and weaker 
sex. 

Having miraculously escaped from the clutches of those raging 
beasts, the few of us here have come to implore the protection of 
New Granada on behalf of our compatriots, the afflicted sons of 
Venezuela. 

In order to base our petition on meritorious grounds, we desire 
now to take part in the civil struggle between this state and the 
province of Santa Marta; and, having already had the honor of 
having our offers of service in the army accepted, we hope to present 
ourselves to this Sovereign Congress as soon as we have accomplished 
our mission. 

The identity of the cause of Venezuela with that which all 
America, particularly New Granada, is engaged in defending, per- 
mits no doubt but that our misfortunes will excite a compassionate 
sympathy in the hearts of your citizens. Yes, the most illustrious 
martyrs in the cause of South American freedom have placed their 
confidence in the strong and liberal spirit of the people of New 
Granada. Caracas, the cradle of Colombian independence, surely 
deserves deliverance, like another Jerusalem, by new crusades of 
faithful republicans: and these republicans can be none other than 
those who, knowing at firsthand the torments which the victims of 
Venezuela suffer, are imbued with a sublime inspiration to become 
the liberators of their captive brothers. 

The safety, the glory, and, what is more, the honor of your con- 
federate states imperatively demand that their borders be protected, 
that Venezuela be vindicated, and that the sacred duty be fulfilled 
of recovering the freedom of South America, establishing therein the 
sacred laws of Justice and restoring to humanity its natural rights. 

Most esteemed Sirs, 

Sim6n BolIvar 

Colonel of the Army and Commandant of Puerto Cabello 

Vicente Tejera, Minister of the High Court of Caracas 

[In the margin ] Tunja, February 18, 1813. To the Executive Power, for 
information and reply; wherein the Congress, viewing as one the cause of 
Venezuela and New Granada, has desired and intends to apply its resources, 
as soon as it is able, in favor of the former. On behalf of the Supreme Con- 
gress, Camacho, Vice President.— Divila,— C. Valenzuela. 


i8 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


9. Memorial to the Citizens of New Granada 

by a Citizen of Caracas 

[Pamphlet, printed 1813] 

Cartagena de [las] Indias, December 15, 1812. 

To spare New Granada the fate of Venezuela and to release the 
latter from its suffering are the objects which I have set for myself 
in this memorial. Condescend to accept it with indulgence, my Fel- 
low-Citizens, for the sake of such laudable objectives. 

I am, Granadans, a son of unhappy Caracas, who miraculously 
escaped from amidst her physical and political ruins, and, ever faith- 
ful to the liberal and just system proclaimed by my country, I have 
come here to follow the banners of independence which so gloriously 
wave in these states. 

Forgive me if I, inspired by patriotic zeal, take the liberty of ad- 
dressing you, in order to sketch briefly the causes that brought 
Venezuela to its destruction. I flatter myself that the terrible and 
exemplary lessons which that defunct Republic has supplied may 
induce America to mend her ways and correct her shortcomings in 
unity, strength, and energy, which are apparent in her governments. 

The most grievous error committed by Venezuela in making her 
start on the political stage was, as none can deny, her fatal adoption 
of the system of tolerance— a system long condemned as weak and 
inadequate by every man of common sense, yet tenaciously main- 
tained with an unparalleled blindness to the very end. 

The first indication of senseless weakness demonstrated by our 
government was manifested in the case of the city of Coro, which, 
having refused to recognize the legitimacy of the government, was 
declared in rebellion and treated as an enemy. The supreme junta , 
instead of subjugating that undefended city, which would have 
surrendered as soon as our maritime forces had appeared ofl: its 
harbor, gave it time to fortify itself and build up a strength so 
respectable that it later succeeded in subjugating the entire con- 
federation almost as easily as we ourselves could previously have 
defeated it. The junta based its policy on poorly understood prin- 
ciples of humanity, which do not authorize governments to use 
force in order to liberate peoples who are ignorant of the value of 
their rights. 

The codes consulted by our magistrates were not those which could 
teach them the practical science of government but were those de- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


19 


vised by certain benevolent visionaries, who, creating fantastic re- 
publics in their imaginations, have sought to attain political perfec- 
tion, assuming the perfectibility of the human race. Thus we were 
given philosophers for leaders, philanthropy for legislation, dialectic 
for tactics, and sophists for soldiers. Through such a distortion of 
principles, the social order was thoroughly shaken, and from that 
time on the State made giant strides toward its general dissolution, 
which, indeed, shortly came to pass. 

Thence was born an impunity toward crimes against the State. 
They were shamelessly committed by the malcontents, and particu- 
larly by our bom and implacable enemies, the European Spaniards, 
who had schemingly remained in our country in order to keep it in 
continual turmoil and to foster whatever conspiracies our judges per- 
mitted them to organize, by always acquitting them even when their 
misdeeds were of such enormity as to endanger public welfare. 

The doctrine which supported this procedure had its origin in the 
charitable maxims of a few writers who defend the thesis that no 
man is vested with the right to deprive another of his life even 
though he be guilty of the crime of treason. Under the cloak of this 
pious doctrine, every conspiracy was followed by acquittal; and every 
acquittal by another conspiracy, which again brought acquittal- 
all because a liberal government must be characterized by clemency. 
Criminal clemency, more than anything else, contributed to the 
destruction of the structure which we had not yet entirely com- 
pleted! 

Next came the firm opposition to raising seasoned, disciplined 
troops, prepared to take their place on the field of battle and in- 
doctrinated with the desire to defend liberty with success and 
honor. Instead, innumerable undisciplined militia units were formed. 
The salaries paid the staff officers of these units exhausted the 
funds of the national treasury. Agriculture was destroyed because 
the farmers were torn from their homes; this brought odium upon the 
Government which had forced them to abandon their families and 
take up arms. 

"Republics,” said our statesmen, "have no need for hirelings to 
maintain their liberty. Every citizen will turn soldier when the enemy 
attacks us. Greece, Rome, Venice, Genoa, Switzerland, Holland, 
and recently North America defeated their adversaries without the 
aid of mercenary troops, who stand always ready to support despot- 
ism and subjugate their fellow-citizens.” 

With such political thinking and inaccurate reasoning, they de- 


20 


SELECTED WRITINGS OP BOLIVAR 


ceived the simple-minded; but they did not convince the judicious 
who clearly understood the immense difference between the peoples, 
times, and customs of those republics and ours. It is true that they 
did not pay standing armies, but that was because these did not exist 
in antiquity; the safety and the honor of their states was entrusted 
to their civic virtues, their austere habits, and their military qualities— 
traits which we are very far from possessing. As regards the modem 
nations which have thrown off the yoke of tyranny, it is well known 
that they have maintained the number of hardened veterans neces- 
sary to insure their security. North America, however, being at 
peace with the world and protected by the sea, has not seen fit, in 
recent years, to maintain the complement of veteran troops needed 
to defend her borders and cities. 

What followed in Venezuela was bitter evidence of the error of 
her calculations. The militia that went to meet the enemy, not 
knowing how to handle arms and unaccustomed to discipline and 
obedience, was routed at the very beginning of the last campaign, 
notwithstanding the heroic and extraordinary efforts of their leaders 
to lead them to victory. This defeat caused general discouragement 
among soldiers and officers, for it is a military truth that only battle- 
hardened armies are capable of surmounting the first reverses of a 
campaign. The novice soldier believes all is lost when he has once 
been routed. Experience has not proved to him that bravery, skill, and 
perseverance can mend misfortune. 

The subdividing of the province of Caracas, planned, discussed, 
and sanctioned by the Federal Congress, awakened and fomented 
bitter rivalry against the capital in the smaller cities and towns. 
“Which, ” said congressmen, eager for control of their districts, “was 
the tyrant among cities and the leech of the State?” In this way the 
flame of civil war was kindled in Valencia, and, even with the re- 
duction of that city, it was never extinguished. It remained hidden 
under the surface and spread to the adjacent towns of Coro and 
Maracaibo. These cities established communications with Valencia, 
thereby facilitating the entry of the Spaniards, which brought about 
the fall of Venezuela. 

The dissipation of the public taxes for frivolous and harmful pur- 
poses, and particularly on salaries for an infinite number of office- 
holders, secretaries, judges, magistrates, and provincial and federal 
legislators dealt the Republic a mortal blow, since it was obliged to 
seek recourse in the dangerous expedient of issuing paper money, 
with no other guarantee than the probable revenues and backing of 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


21 


the Confederation. This new money, in the eyes of most people, was 
a direct violation of property rights, because they felt that they were 
being deprived of objects of intrinsic value in exchange for others 
of uncertain and even problematical worth. The paper money roused 
discontent among the otherwise indifferent people of the interior; 
hence, they called upon the commandant of the Spanish troops to 
come and free them from a currency which they regarded with a 
horror greater than slavery. 

But what weakened the Venezuelan government most was the 
federal form it adopted in keeping with the exaggerated precepts of 
the rights of man; this form by authorizing self-government, disrupts 
social contracts and reduces nations to anarchy. Such was the 
true state of the Confederation. Each province governed itself in- 
dependently; and, following this example, each city demanded like 
powers, based on the practice of the provinces and on the theory that 
all men and all peoples are entitled to establish arbitrarily the form 
of government that pleases them. 

The federal system, although the most perfect and the most 
capable of providing for human happiness in society, is, nevertheless, 
the most contrary to the interests of our infant states. Generally 
speaking, our fellow-citizens are not yet able to exercise their rights 
themselves in the fullest measure, because they lack the political vir- 
tues that characterize true republicans— virtues that are not acquired 
under absolute governments, where the rights and duties of the 
citizen are not recognized. 

Moreover, what country in the world, however well trained and 
republican it may be, can, amidst internal factions and foreign war, 
be governed by so complicated and weak a system as the federal? No, 
this system cannot possibly be maintained during the turbulence of 
battles and political factions. It is essential that a government mold 
itself, so to speak, to the nature of the circumstances, the times, and 
the men that comprise it. If these factors are prosperity and peace, 
the government should be mild and protecting; but if they are 
turbulence and disaster, it should be stern and arm itself with a 
firmness that matches the dangers, without regard for laws or con- 
stitutions until happiness and peace have been reestablished. 

Caracas was made to suffer severely by the shortcomings of the 
Confederation, which, far from aiding it, exhausted its treasury and 
war supplies. When danger threatened, the Confederation aban- 
doned the city to its fate without assisting it with even a small con- 
tingent. The Confederation, moreover, created new difficulties, for 


22 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


the rivalry which developed between the federal and the provincial 
authorities enabled the enemies to penetrate deep into the heart of 
the State and to occupy a large part of the province before the ques- 
tion as to whether federal or provincial troops should go out to repel 
them was settled. This fatal debate resulted in a terrible and costly 
delay to our armies, for they were routed at San Carlos while await- 
ing the reinforcements needed for victory. 

I believe that, unless we centralize our American governments, 
our enemies will gain every advantage. We will inevitably be in- 
volved in the horrors of civil strife and miserably defeated by that 
handful of bandits who infest our territories. 

The popular elections held by the simple people of the country 
and by the scheming inhabitants of the city added a further obstacle 
to our practice of federation, because the former are so ignorant that 
they cast their votes mechanically and the latter so ambitious that 
they convert everything into factions. As a result, Venezuela never 
witnessed a free and proper election and the government was placed 
in the hands of men who were either inept, immoral, or opposed to 
the cause of independence. Party spirit determined everything and, 
consequently, caused us more disorganization than the circumstances 
themselves. Our division, not Spanish arms, returned us to slavery. 

The earthquake of March 26 , to be sure, was physically and 
morally destructive and can properly be termed the immediate cause 
of Venezuela's ruin; but this event could have happened without 
producing such fatal results had Caracas been governed at that time 
by a single authority, who, acting promptly and vigorously, could 
have repaired the damage without those hindrances and rivalries 
which retarded the effectiveness of the measures taken and allowed 
the evil to grow to such proportions that it is beyond remedy. 

If Caracas had established the simple government that its politi- 
cal and military situation required, instead of a slow-moving and 
insubstantial confederation, Venezuela would still exist and enjoy 
its freedom today! 

Following the earthquake, ecclesiastical influences played a very 
considerable part in the insurgency of the villages and smaller towns, 
and in bringing enemies into the country, thereby sacrilegiously 
abusing the sanctity of their office in behalf of the fomenters of 
civil war. We must, nevertheless, honestly confess that these traitor- 
ous priests were encouraged to commit the execrable crimes of which 
they are justly accused because they enjoyed absolute impunity for 
their crimes— an impunity which found scandalous support in the 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


23 

Congress. This injustice reached such a point that, following the 
insurrection of the city of Valencia, the pacification of which cost 
up perhaps a thousand men, not a single rebel was brought to justice; 
all retained their lives and many their property. 

From the above it follows that among the causes that brought 
about Venezuela’s downfall the nature of its Constitution ranks first, 
which, I repeat, was as contrary to Venezuela’s interests as it was 
favorable to those of her adversaries; second, the spirit of misanthropy 
which possessed our governing officials; third, the opposition to the 
establishment of a military force which could save the Republic and 
repulse the Spanish attacks; fourth, the earthquake, accompanied by 
a fanaticism that used this occurrence to its best advantage; and, last, 
the internal factions which in reality were the fatal poison that laid 
the country in its tomb. 

These instances of error and misfortune will not be entirely with- 
out benefit to the peoples of South America who aspire to achieve 
liberty and independence. 

New Granada has seen Venezuela succumb and should therefore 
avoid the pitfalls that destroyed the latter. To this end, I submit, as 
a measure indispensable for the security of New Granada, the re- 
conquest of Caracas. At first sight this project will appear farfetched, 
costly, perhaps impracticable; but, examined closely, with foresight 
and careful reflection, it is as impossible to deny its necessity as to 
fail to put it into execution once it is proved advisable. 

The first factor which offers itself in support of this operation is 
the fundamental cause of the destruction of Caracas, which was 
simply the contempt with which that city regarded the existence of 
an enemy who appeared of little account but who, taken in his true 
light, was not so at all. 

Coro certainly could not have competed with Caracas, if intrinsic 
strength had been the deciding factor; but, in the realm of human 
vicissitudes, it is not always physical preponderance that governs. 
If superiority of moral power determines political balance, the gov- 
ernment of Venezuela should, for this reason, have wiped out an 
enemy, who, while seemingly weak, was backed by the province of 
Maracaibo and by all those provinces which obeyed the Regency, by 
gold, and by the cooperation of our eternal enemies, the Europeans 
who reside among us. Further, Coro was supported by the clerical 
party, always devoted to its companion and aid, despotism; and she 
had, above all, the never-ending support of every ignorant and super- 
stitious person within the limits of our states. Thus, no sooner did 


24 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


one traitorous official submit to the enemy, than the political ma- 
chinery was upset, and all the unparalleled patriotic efforts exerted 
by the defenders of Caracas proved insufficient to prevent the fall 
of an edifice already tottering from the blow that it had received 
from one single man. 

Applying the example of Venezuela to New Granada and putting 
it in the form of a ratio, we find that Coro is to Caracas as Caracas 
is to all America; consequendy, the danger which threatens this 
country is in proportion to the foregoing ratio. With Spain in posses- 
sion of the territory of Venezuela, she can easily draw upon it for 
men, provisions, and munitions of war, and her armies, under the 
direction of leaders who have had experience against those great 
masters of warfare, the French, can move inland from the provinces 
of Barinas and Maracaibo to the farthest confines of South America. 

Spain today has a great number of daring and ambitious general 
officers, long accustomed to danger and to privations, who long to 
come here and seek an empire to replace that which they have just 
lost. 

It is probable that following the downfall of the Peninsula there 
will be a tremendous emigration of men of all classes, particularly of 
cardinals, archbishops, bishops, canons, and revolutionary clerics, all 
capable not only of subverting our incipient, faltering states, but of 
encompassing the entire new world in frightful anarchy. The reli- 
gious influence, the rule of civil and military domination, and all the 
prestige they can bring to bear upon the human spirit will be addi- 
tional instruments which they will use in subjugating these countries. 

Nothing will stand in the way of Spanish emigration. It is con- 
ceivable that England will cover the escape of a group whose de- 
parture would partially weaken the forces of Bonaparte in Spain 
and tend to increase and add new life to their own party in America. 
Neither France nor North America will be able to prevent this move- 
ment, and our attempts would be even more futile, for none of us 
has a navy worthy of the name. 

These £migr£s will assuredly find a friendly welcome in Vene- 
zuelan ports, since they come to reinforce the oppressors of that 
country; and those ports will provide them with the means with 
which to undertake the conquest of the independent states. 

They will raise fifteen or twenty thousand men, whom their 
leaders, officers, sergeants, corporals, and veteran soldiers will rapidly 
drill and discipline. This army will be followed by another yet more 
terrible, of ministers, ambassadors, councilors, magistrates, all the 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


2 5 

ecclesiastical hierarchy and the grandees of Spain, whose trade is 
deceit and intrigue, and all bearing imposing titles designed to dazzle 
the multitude. And, descending like a torrent, they will overrun the 
land tearing Colombia's tree of liberty down to its very roots. The 
troops will fight on the field, but this army will battle us from their 
desks, using seduction and fanaticism for arms. 

Thus, to fend off these calamities, we have no other recourse than 
rapidly to pacify our rebellious provinces, before turning our arms 
upon our enemies. In this manner soldiers and officers worthy to be 
called the bulwarks of their country can be developed. 

Everything conspires to make us adopt this measure. In addition 
to the urgent necessity of closing the gates against the enemy, there 
are other reasons which force us to take the offensive, reasons so 
overwhelming that it would be a military error and a political 
blunder not to do so. We have been invaded, and consequently we 
are obliged to hurl the enemy back across the border. Moreover, it 
is a principle of the art of war that every defensive action is harmful 
and ruinous for those who wage it, as it weakens them without hope 
of recovery. Hostilities in enemy territory, however, are always ad- 
vantageous by reason of the good that results from the enemy's mis- 
fortunes; thus on no account should we employ the defensive. 

We must also consider the present condition of the enemy, who 
is in a very critical position. The majority of his creole soldiers have 
deserted at a time when he is obliged to garrison the patriot cities 
of Caracas, Puerto Cabello, La Guayra, Barcelona, Cumand, and 
Margarita, where he keeps his stores. He does not dare to leave these 
towns unguarded for fear of a general insurrection the moment he 
departs. Thus it would not be impossible for our troops to reach the 
gates of Caracas without engaging in a single open battle. 

It is a certainty that, as soon as we enter Venezuela, we will be 
joined by thousands of valiant patriots, who anxiously await our 
coming in order to throw off the yoke of their tyrants and unite 
their efforts with ours in the defense of liberty. 

The nature of the present campaign affords us the advantage of 
approaching Maracaibo by way of Santa Marta, and Barinas by way 
of Cucuta. 

Let us, therefore, avail ourselves of a time so propitious, lest the 
reinforcements, which might at any moment arrive from Spain, com- 
pletely alter the aspect of affairs; and lest we lose, perhaps forever, 
the welcome opportunity to insure the destiny of these states. 

The honor of New Granada imperiously demands that she teach 


26 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


these audacious invaders a lesson, by pursuing them to their last en- 
trenchments. Her good name depends upon her taking over the task 
of marching into Venezuela to free that cradle of Colombian inde- 
pendence, its martyrs, and the deserving people of Caracas, whose 
cries are addressed only to their beloved compatriots, the Granadans, 
whose arrival, as their redeemers, they await with despairing im- 
patience. Let us hasten to break the chains of those victims who groan 
in the dungeons, ever hopeful of rescue. Make not a mockery of their 
trust. Be not insensible to the cries of your brothers. Fly to avenge the 
dead, to give life to the dying, to bring freedom to the oppressed and 
liberty to all. 

Sim6n Bolivar 

Printshop of C. Diego Espinoza. [Cartagena], 1813 . 


1813 


10. To [Brigadier Manuel del Castillo] 

[Copy] 

San Jos6 de Cucuta, March 30, 1813. 

Dear friend and comrade: 

I am enclosing an official letter [oficio] in reply to yours of the 
20th of this month, relative to confiscations, in which you will note 
that it has never been my intention to augment my powers to the 
detriment of yours. Moreover, I have taken part in this affair on 
the strength of the commission granted me for the purpose, respect- 
ing which I could submit numerous documents authorizing me 
therein; but what I desire most is not only to rid myself of this 
troublesome commission but also to resign all military authority, for 
the good of the service and to spare myself the annoyances I suffer 
daily in the exercise of my unsolicited command of the army, which 
the Sovereign Congress of the Union has, at your suggestion, deigned 
to confer upon me. 

Previously, I proposed to you that I relinquish command of the 
army so that it might fall to you. This proposal appears to me just 
and expedient. I am again making this same offer, and I can assure 
you in all sincerity that nothing would please me more than to tender 
a resignation which would bring about an improved organization of 
the army and a greater harmony among all its parts. 1 Kindly let me 
have your reply to this matter verbally or in writing. 

I am not answering you officially on the charges you level at me 
because Major Ricaurte has told me you are prepared to reconcile 
the differences that, much to my regret and without any action on 
my part, have come between us. I am with the greatest sincerity and 
affection, your true friend and companion, 

Sim6n BolIvar 

A true Copy. San Jos6 15 [sic] of 1813. The 3d [year]. Briceno 
M6ndez, Secretary. 

A true Copy. Gutierrez. 

1 Castillo, as the leader of Cartagena’s military forces, continued to obstruct 
Bolivar’s plans; see Doc. 36 (ed.). 


28 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

11. To [Crisanto Valenzuela], Secretary of State 
of the United Provinces of New Granada 

[Original] 

General Headquarters, Cucuta, April 8, 1813. 
Secretary of State of the Government of the Union: 

I am convinced by the arguments set forth by Your Excellency in 
your official letter of the 29th of this month [sic], which I have the 
honor to answer, in which you point out the necessity, before rushing 
into a hopeless enterprise, of estimating the forces of the enemy and 
those under my command, and of considering the resources which 
he can rely upon and which I cannot hope for while I am deep 
in Venezuela. Your Excellency very wisely points out that we must 
examine the state of public opinion in those provinces and ascertain 
how far it can be trusted, how our army is to be maintained, how 
our losses in arms and men are to be replaced, and, last, how the 
rearguard is to be covered and how the retreat of so small a body of 
men is to be assured if, unfortunately, it should suffer reverses such 
as may always occur in war. Monteverde, Your Excellency states, is 
not the same enemy that I have defeated here. He is an intrepid, 
hardened soldier, who in four months has subjugated all Venezuela 
and has defeated the numerous forces he has faced in every en- 
counter he has had with them, while the other [Correa] is a block- 
head who has not moved for nine months despite the most fortunate 
events which have all but opened the gates of New Granada to him. 

Allow me, Your Excellency, for the last time and by way of ex- 
planation of my previous communications, to make some remarks 
that may clarify, to some extent, the matter and which may serve me, 
so to speak, as justification for the military enterprises that I have had 
the liberty of proposing to the Sovereign Congress of the Union. 

Your Excellency has decided the question, and I am entirely in 
agreement with your estimation of the respective merits of Monte- 
verde and Correa. To the former you attribute great military ability 
because, in four months and despite inferior forces, he has conquered 
the Republic of Venezuela. The latter you label stupid because he 
has remained inactive for nine months while the gates of New 
Granada have been open to him. Monteverde, it is true, command- 
ing a handful of men, achieved the most brilliant successes because 
he knew how to take advantage of the favorable circumstances which 
resulted from the discontent of several Europeans and a few priests, 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


2 9 

and from the panic which the earthquake caused among a section of 
the common people. 

That panic is now incomparably greater in the minds not only 
of the common people but among the men of understanding and 
power who generally direct the multitude. It is caused by the persecu- 
tions carried on by all Europeans or [Canary] Islanders as a type of 
anarchy against the natives of the land, whom they molest in the 
streets, in the plazas, in the markets, in the jails, and in the courts, 
with their typical barbarity. Disgust is rife among the sane members 
of the towns, including persons of ecclesiastical calling, whose rela- 
tives, friends, and life-long companions, burdened by heavy chains 
and suffering the greatest humiliations, are buried alive in dungeons 
and prison ships. 

This, Mr. Secretary, is a second earthquake, made to order for the 
enemy party. And, while the first demolished the cities, the second 
has destroyed public opinion, which fanaticism or prejudice has 
turned in favor of the tyrants. Authentic evidence of this truth is the 
recent insurrection of Cumand and the conspiracy of Caracas. These 
occurrences are certain, and only their results can be doubted. Ac- 
cordingly, and with good reason, I should be blamed, as was Correa, 
for not reaching Caracas, where the gates are open and where the 
minds of the inhabitants are disposed to bid us welcome. I am in 
command of over 1,000 riflemen, with the corresponding quota of 
artillery and as many cavalry troops as we may wish to raise; if 
Correa was a fool for not taking New Granada with only 700 men, 
then I must be an idiot if I do not liberate Venezuela with such a 
sizeable and victorious army. 

Monteverde is praised solely for having shown enterprise and 
foolhardiness in undertaking a task superior to his forces and his 
talents; but, aided by the force of circumstances and the turn of 
events, he achieved results beyond the calculations of probability. 
What logic, therefore, favors this adventurer, with no more ability 
than the ordinary soldier, with fewer resources and forces inferior to 
ours, who supports an odious cause, and whose situation is much 
more difficult than ours? By what logic, I ask, can he be regarded 
as capable of securing such extraordinary advantages whereas we are 
denied even the possibility which is written into the order of events? 

I can tell Your Excellency, in passing, that I know Monteverde 
and Correa, against whom I have fought with varying fortunes— 
against the former when he was victorious and against the latter 
when I defeated him. Yet, judging both officers with due impar- 


3° SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

tiality, I am compelled to accord Correa the respect he has earned 
by bearing himself with the valor of a soldier and the dignity of a 
noble leader. Monteverde has never surpassed Correa in these virtues, 
as he has never met the enemy at such close range as has the latter. 
Correa, moreover, possesses a military skill which is denied by no 
one, but which the former notoriously lacks. Nor have Monteverde s 
victories been so consistent and successive as Your Excellency asserts. 
Out of ten actions that took place in Venezuela, only the first four 
went in his favor, while the last six he lost. He suffered a complete 
defeat in three of these; and it must be concluded that the shameful 
capitulations of Miranda were not the work of Monteverde but of 
circumstance and the cowardice of the general of the Venezuelan 
army. 

I close by saying that through the same measures that enabled 
the oppressor of Caracas to subjugate the Confederation, yes, by 
those very same measures and with greater certainty than he, I pro- 
pose to redeem my country. 

I am a soldier and my duty prescribes for me only blind obedience 
to the government, without examining the nature of its decisions, 
which doubtless are, and must be, the wisest and the most just, medi- 
tated and conceived with that depth and wisdom which charac- 
terize His Excellency the President of the Congress, the members 
of that sovereign body, and the Secretary of State. 

I understand that I must not proceed beyond La Grita. I await your 
further orders that I may execute them as Your Excellency shall be 
good enough to communicate them to me, in the firm understanding 
that my greatest glory is gladly to submit to the sovereign government 
of the Onion, of which I am the most loyal and devoted servant. 

May God watch over Your Excellency for many years. 

SIMON BOLtVAR 

[In the margin ] Tunja, April 24, 1813. To the Congress, which has the 
records of the correspondence between the second and first commanders of 
the Northern Army and the requests that each has made for the decision it 
may deem advisable and which the Executive Power considers to be of the 
greatest urgency, owing to the dangerous point which the disagreement has 
reached and the necessity of giving some leadership to the forces. -Gutierrez. 
—Tunja, April 28, 1813. As provided in the communications of the 12th and 
15th of the present month. On behalf of the Congress— Camacho, Vice Presi- 
dent.— Ddvila. Cuevas. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


31 


12. Proclamation to the People of Venezuela 1 
[Original] 

Trujillo, June 15, 1813. 

SIMON BOLIVAR, Liberator of Venezuela, Brigadier of the 
Union, General in Chief of the Northern Army 

To his fellow-countrymen: 

Venezuelans: An army of your brothers, sent by the Sovereign 
Congress of New Granada, has come to liberate you. Having expelled 
the oppressors from the provinces of M6rida and Trujillo, it is now 
among you. 

We are sent to destroy the Spaniards, to protect the Americans, 
and to reestablish the republican governments that once formed the 
Confederation of Venezuela. The states defended by our arms are 
again governed by their former constitutions and tribunals, in full 
enjoyment of their liberty and independence, for our mission is de- 
signed only to break the chains of servitude which still shackle some 
of our towns, and not to impose laws or exercise acts of dominion 
to which the rules of war might entitle us. 

Moved by your misfortunes, we have been unable to observe 
with indifference the afflictions you were forced to experience by 
the barbarous Spaniards, who have ravished you, plundered you, and 
brought you death and destruction. They have violated the sacred 
rights of nations. They have broken the most solemn agreements and 
treaties. In fact, they have committed every manner of crime, re- 
ducing the Republic of Venezuela to the most frightful desolation. 
Justice therefore demands vengeance, and necessity compels us to 
exact it. Let the monsters who infest Colombian soil, who have 
drenched it in blood, be cast out forever; may their punishment be 
equal to the enormity of their perfidy, so that we may eradicate the 
stain of our ignominy and demonstrate to the nations of the world 
that the sons of America cannot be offended with impunity. 

Despite our just resentment toward the iniquitous Spaniards, our 
magnanimous heart still commands us to open to them for the last 
time a path to reconciliation and friendship; they are invited to live 

1 With this proclamation Bolivar began the 'War to the Death” [guerra a 
muerte ], for which he has been both praised and condemned by historians. In 
evaluating this decision, the savage nature of the conflict in Venezuela should 
be kept in mind. The circumstances which led to this policy are explained in 
Doc. 16 (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


32 

peacefully among us, if they will abjure their crimes, honestly change 
their ways, and cooperate with us in destroying the intruding Spanish 
government and in the reestablishment of the Republic of Vene- 
zuela. 

Any Spaniard who does not, by every active and effective means, 
work against tyranny in behalf of this just cause, will be considered 
an enemy and punished; as a traitor to the nation, he will in- 
evitably be shot by a firing squad. On the other hand, a general and 
absolute amnesty is granted to those who come over to our army with 
or without their arms, as well as to those who render aid to the 
good citizens who are endeavoring to throw off the yoke of tyranny. 
Army officers and civil magistrates who proclaim the government of 
Venezuela and join with us shall retain their posts and positions; in 
a word, those Spaniards who render outstanding service to the State 
shall be regarded and treated as Americans. 

And you Americans who, by error or treachery, have been lured 
from the paths of justice, are informed that your brothers, deeply 
regretting the error of your ways, have pardoned you as we are 
profoundly convinced that you cannot be truly to blame, for only 
the blindness and ignorance in which you have been kept up to now 
by those responsible for your crimes could have induced you to com- 
mit them. Fear not the sword that comes to avenge you and to 
sever the ignoble ties with which your executioners have bound you 
to their own fate. You are hereby assured, with absolute impunity, 
of your honor, lives, and property. The single tide, "Americans,' ” 
shall be your safeguard and guarantee. Our arms have come to pro- 
tect you, and they shall never be raised against a single one of you, 
our brothers. 

This amnesty is extended even to the very traitors who most re- 
cendy have committed felonious acts, and it shall be so religiously 
applied that no reason, cause, or pretext will be sufficient to oblige us 
to violate our offer, however extraordinary and extreme the occasion 
you may give to provoke our wrath. 

Spaniards and Canary Islanders, you will die, though you be 
neutral, unless you actively espouse the cause of America s libera- 
tion. Americans, you will live, even if you have trespassed. 

General Headquarters, Trujillo, June 15, 1813. The 3d [year]. 

Sim6n BolIvar 


A true Copy. Pedro Briceno Mendez, Secretary. 



Bolivar in the Earthquake of 1812 













SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


33 


13. To [Camilio Torres], President of the United Provinces 
of New Granada 

[Original] 

General Headquarters, La Victoria, August 5, 1813. 
Your Excellency: 

At last I have the satisfaction of informing Your Excellency that 
the campaign has ended in the occupation of Caracas and La Guaira 
by our victorious troops. This news is all the more gratifying because 
of the manner in which that city was delivered, wholly without the 
bloodshed and disaster that it would inevitably have suffered had it 
been taken by force of arms. 

Yesterday, August 4, five commissioners presented themselves to 
me in this village. They were sent by the Spanish government, which 
has been oppressing the towns within the capital district of Caracas, 
in order to treat with me respecting an adjustment or capitulation 
that would end the war. They gave me the credentials authorizing 
them to enter into the negotiations, and by virtue of these I called 
them to a conference which resulted in the treaty, a copy of which 
I enclose for Your Excellency, together with the credentials of the 
envoys and the communication which carried my reply to their 
superiors. 

I deem it superfluous to point out to Your Excellency the considera- 
tions which caused me to take this step, since the advantage resulting 
from it is too apparent for me to doubt but that it will be approved 
in all its parts. By this action, in addition to insuring the principal 
object of my mission, which is only to redeem Venezuela from servi- 
tude, we have also succeeded in taking the arms and munitions that 
the enemy possessed and which they surely would have carried off 
had not flight been their only means of saving themselves. 

I have, Your Excellency, executed my offer to liberate my country, 
and Your Excellency has the clearest proof that I could possibly have 
given that it was no mere adventurous enterprise, as some would have 
had your government believe. So far was it from being adventurous 
that a more successful campaign cannot be imagined. During the 
three months that I waged war in Venezuela, I did not go into an 
action from which we did not emerge victorious and from each en- 
counter, by surprising the enemy through unexpected marches, I 
obtained every possible advantage, while the valor of my soldiers 
struck them with terror. 


34 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


To complete my task only the stronghold of Puerto Cabello re- 
mains to be taken. But it will not long resist, even if it should fail to 
heed the warning that I intend to send it from Caracas, where I am 
about to go at this moment, to put the treaties into effect and to or- 
ganize matters in such a manner that I may be able to proceed wher- 
ever necessity should require. 

From there I shall advise Your Excellency at length on the ter- 
mination of the war and the new objectives that should occupy our 
attention. 

May God keep Your Excellency many years. 

SIMON BOLfVAR 

[In the margin] Tunja, September 24, 1813.-To the Congress for its in- 
formation and satisfaction.-Cuevas.-Tunja, September 28, 1813. After the 
Congress has been informed of this report it shall be returned to the Execu- 
tive Power [President]. -On behalf of the Congress: Camacho, Vice President. - 
Ddvila.— C. Valenzuela, Secretary. 


14. To the Politico-Military Commission of the Supreme 
Congress of New Granada 

[Original] 

Caracas, August 8, 1813. 

Gentlemen: 

From the illustrious capital of Venezuela, I have the honor to in- 
form you of the reestablishment of this republic, which the heroic 
feats of the New Granadan armies have created from nothing. 

The inhabitants of Venezuela are filled with the most tender grati- 
tude and are unceasing in blessing the fine generosity with which 
the Granadan Supreme Congress, in response to their laments, sent 
its redeeming hosts to restore them to the dignity of men, from whence 
the Spanish tyranny had removed them, and, at the same time return- 
ing their property, their honor, and their families, which for the space 
of an entire year they had been forced to abandon while seeking ref- 
uge in the wilderness, in order to escape the persecution which befell 
those who fulfilled the duty of loving their country. 

Two days ago I had the delightful satisfaction, amidst the ruins of 
this city, of receiving the sincere thanks of its people, who, in the 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


35 

pure joy of expressing themselves, gave vent to sentiments that the 
power of the tyrants had long suppressed. 

The withdrawal of the enemy is conclusive proof of their great 
fear of us. Although the treaties that they proposed to me were still 
pending, they abandoned this city and that of La Guaira simply be- 
cause they feared that the treaties might not be accepted. Both places 
were left in the most frightful anarchy, without a responsible govern- 
ment, and without a force to check disturbers of public order, who, in 
fact, were encouraged by the enemy to plunder and destroy the state 
storehouses, in order to reduce the resources that would be ours by 
virtue of the treaties, in which their own perverse conduct did not 
permit them to place any trust, on the supposition, no doubt, that 
our word is as easily broken as theirs. 

The two divisions of the Spaniards Budia and Marmol, the only 
ones that remained, were forced to surrender to me almost intact, 
after finding themselves cut off from and abandoned by Governor 
Fierro, who has disappeared and whose whereabouts is unknown. 

After my mind has recovered from its present excitement caused 
by the joy which fills it upon seeing my country free, by the many 
courtesies which distract me, and finally by the multitude of citizens 
who come to rejoice with me over the liberation of the Republic, I 
shall dwell at greater length upon the many matters that now demand 
our attention. 

Until a legal and permanent government is organized, I am exer- 
cising the supreme authority, which I shall deliver into the hands of 
an assembly of prominent citizens of this capital, which must be con- 
voked in order to form a government conforming to the nature of the 
situation and the instructions that I have received from your august 
Congress. 

I am enclosing for Your Excellencies copies of the proclamation 
and manifesto that I have given to the inhabitants of this great capi- 
tal, who have received them with indescribable expressions of joy. 

May God keep you many years. 

sim6n bolivar 

[In the margin] On folding this paper, it was blurred, as you can 
see, but pressure of time does not permit its being recopied. Kindly, 
therefore, pardon this deficiency.— Vale. 

Tunja, October 7, 1813. Received last night, owing to delay caused by the 
incident of Bailadores; send to the Congress for its gratification. 

Tunja, October 8, 1813.— After Congress is familiar with contents, to be re- 
turned to the Executive Power. On behalf of the Congress.— Castillo, Vice 
President. Ddvila.— C. Valenzuela, Secretary of State. 


3^ SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

15. To [Narciso Coll y Prat], Archbishop of Venezuela 
[ Original ] 

Caracas, August 10, 1813. 

Most Reverend Sir: 

The treacherous and pernicious behavior of the intruding Spanish 
government has reduced a flourishing country (which the Supreme 
Being has not condemned to an eternal dependency on Spain) to a 
state of lamentable and unprecedented desolation, which the leader 
of Venezuela, because of his duty and authority, is endeavoring to 
repair by the most effective and energetic measures. From cruel ex- 
perience I have discovered that the temporizations and the period 
of impunity during the era of the first supreme junta and the early 
executives rendered conspirators and enemies all the bolder. And, 
what is more astonishing, those authorities did nothing to stop the 
encouragements that were supplied in the confessional to the silent 
war which in the end destroyed our independence. 

The General in Chief, since the reestablishment of the Republic, 
has employed and will continue to employ in his rulings a measure 
of sternness that strikes terror into the hearts of these perfidious 
schemers, maintains a proper respect for all subjects of the govern- 
ment, and inspires among other nations such decorous consideration 
as becomes the flag of a civilized and victorious republic. 

The time is past for ignoring government decrees. The full weight 
of the law will fall upon violators. Consequently, as Your Reverences 
orders are animated by the same spirit, you should suggest to all the 
curates, prebendaries, and confessors of the archdiocese that, under 
penalty of the powers within your authority, they expound each 
week the just principles of American emancipation and explain the 
obligation to embrace and defend them at the sacrifice of personal in- 
terests and life itself. Encourage them to warn the simple against the 
allurements and the probable crimes of agitators, and, above all, make 
it plain that all who live under protection of the Government should 
also cooperate with its aims. 

The confessional, which, because of its secrecy, is beyond the scope 
of public inquiry, should be of principal concern to Your Reverence s 
reforms. It would appear that abuse of this sacred ministry, which 
Your Reverence directs, could be most effectively prevented if any 
who, in administering confession, should seek to undermine political 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


37 

opinion that favors the present Government, were to be considered 
suspended from their duties because of that fact alone. 

May God keep Your Excellency for many years. 

SlMdN BOLlVAR 

[In the margin] August 10, 1813.— Munoz T£bar. 

That same day he received a reply telling him that His Excellency was 
preparing another circular letter in addition to the one issued August 5. 

The 13th of the same month: a copy of the circular letter to be issued 
pursuant to this communication was sent to the General so that it might meet 
with his approval. 


16. To [James Cockburn], Governor of Curasao 
[Copy] 

General Headquarters, Valencia, October 2, 1813. 
My most esteemed Sir: 

I have the honor to reply to your letter of September 4 last, which 
I received yesterday, no doubt delayed by causes unknown to me in 
transit from your island to the port of La Guaira. 

The respect that I must pay to a leader of the British nation and 
to the glory of the American cause places me in the sacred obligation 
of informing Your Excellency of the painful causes for the conduct 
that I regretfully pursue toward the Spaniards, who this past year 
left Venezuela in ruins. They have committed crimes that should be 
condemned to eternal oblivion; but the necessity of justifying, in the 
eyes of the world, the war to death which we have launched obliges 
us to remove them from the scaffolds and horrible dungeons wherein 
they lie concealed, in order to bring them before Your Excellency. 

Consider a continent, separated from Spain by immense seas, and 
more populous and rich than she, subjected for three centuries to a 
degrading and tyrannical dependency. In 1810, on learning of the 
dissolution of the Spanish governments by the occupation of the 
French armies, this continent began to take measures to spare itself 
that same fate and to escape the anarchy and confusion with which 
it was threatened. Venezuela was the first to set up a junta to main- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


38 

tain the rights of Ferdinand VII, until the decisive outcome of the 
war could be determined, and she offered a fraternal asylum to the 
Spaniards who sought to emigrate. She placed many of them in 
the magistracy and left in their posts all who occupied the positions 
of greatest influence and importance— adequate proof of the desire for 
unity which animated the Venezuelans, a desire which met with a 
deceitful response from the Spaniards, every one of whom, in general, 
betrayed, with the blackest perfidy, the confidence and generosity of 
our people. 

Indeed, Venezuela, in adopting that measure, was impelled by an 
irresistible necessity. In less critical circumstances, provinces of Spain, 
not so large as Venezuela, have set up governing councils to keep out 
disorder and disturbances. And should not Venezuela similarly pro- 
tect herself from so many calamities and insure her existence against 
the swiftly moving events in Europe? Was she not harming the 
Spaniards of the Peninsula by remaining exposed to the upheavals 
that might have followed from the lack of a recognized government, 
and should they not have been grateful for our sacrifices in affording 
them a safe refuge? Who would have thought that a rigid blockade 
and bitter hostilities would be the reward of such generosity? 

Convinced that Spain had been completely defeated, as was also 
believed in the rest of America, Venezuela took the step which she 
had long been able to take, using as authorization the example of the 
provinces of Spain, to whom she had been declared to be equal in 
rights and political representation. Then came the Regency, which 
was hastily established in Cddiz, the only place not subject to the 
French flag. From C&diz, the Regency hurled its destructive decrees 
against certain free populations who, although unobligated, had 
maintained relations and national unity with a people of whom they 
were naturally independent. 

Such was the generous spirit that animated the first revolution in 
America, a revolution without blood, hate, or vengeance. Is it not pos- 
sible that, in Venezuela, in Buenos Aires, and in New Granada, a 
just resentment might have arisen against so much grief and violence 
which would have destroyed those viceroys, governors, and regents— 
all those agents, hangmen of their own kind, who, taking pleasure in 
the death of Americans, caused the most distinguished and exemplary 
of men to perish in rank dungeons, robbed honest men of the fruits of 
their toil, and, in general, persecuted industry, the useful arts, and 
whatever else might have lightened the horrors of our servitude? 

For three centuries America groaned beneath this tyranny, the most 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


39 

grueling ever to afflict the human race. For three centuries America 
bemoaned the tragic riches that held such great attraction for her 
oppressors. And when just Providence presented her with the unex- 
pected opportunity to break the chains, far from pondering vengeance 
for those injuries, America invited her very enemies to share her 
bounties and asylum. 

Now that almost every section of the New World is engaged in a 
cruel and ruinous war; now that the furies of unrest agitate the re- 
motest settler; now that sedition has kindled the ravenous fires of war, 
even to the most distant and solitary of villages, and the fields of 
America are stained with men's blood, the reasons will be sought for 
so astounding an upheaval on this peaceful continent, whose mild 
and generous sons have always been a rare example of willingness 
and obedience unparalleled in the history of any other people of the 
world. 

The fierce Spaniard, spewed upon the shores of Colombia, pro- 
ceeded to transform Nature's loveliest of territories into a vast and 
odious empire of cruelty and plunder. There, Your Excellency, you 
see the wanton instigator of these tragic scenes which we lament. He 
signalized his entrance into the New World by death and desolation. 
He annihilated the original inhabitants, and, when his raging fury 
found no others left to destroy, he turned upon his own sons whom 
he had brought forth in the land that he had usurped. 

See him, Your Excellency, excited by his thirst for blood, scorning 
what is most holy, sacrilegiously trampling underfoot those covenants 
which the world venerates and which have received the seal of in- 
violability in all ages and from all peoples. A capitulation of last year 
gave him all the independent territory of Venezuela. Absolute and 
peaceful submission on the part of the inhabitants convinced him of 
the pacification of the people and of their complete renunciation of 
their former political aspirations. But at the very time that Monte- 
verde swore to the Venezuelans religious compliance with the prom- 
ises given, we witnessed with shock and horror the most barbarous 
and godless violations: towns plundered, buildings fired, women vio- 
lated, whole cities reduced en masse , as it were, to horrible caves, 
bringing reality to that which heretofore had been thought an impos- 
sibility: the imprisonment of an entire people. In effect, only those 
persons who were unimportant and who kept out of the tyrant's sight 
could secure a wretched freedom by confining themselves in isolated 
huts and living among the wild beasts in the jungles. 

How many respectable old men, how many venerable priests were 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


40 

placed in the stocks and subjected to other infamous tortures, im- 
prisoned together with coarse and criminal characters and exposed to 
the mockery of a brutal soldiery and to vile men of all classes? How 
many died under the weight of unbearable chains, deprived of life's 
last breath or exhausted from hunger and suffering? Even as the 
Spanish Constitution was being published as the bulwark of civil 
liberty, hundreds of victims bearing shackles and irons were being 
dragged into filthy, lethal underground vaults. No one offered reasons 
for these actions or troubled to determine the birthplace or political 
opinions of the victims. 

There, Your Excellency, is the unexaggerated but unparalleled pic- 
ture of Spanish tyranny in America. It is a picture that at once arouses 
indignation toward the hangmen and the most just and intense com- 
passion for the victims. But at that time sensible persons did not in- 
tercede in behalf of tortured humanity, nor did they demand com- 
pliance with a pact that was of universal import. Your Excellency 
now interposes your respected mediation on behalf of the savage 
monsters, the perpetrators of so much evil. Please believe me: when 
the troops of New Granada under my command first set out to 
avenge grossly offended Nature and society, neither the instructions 
of that beneficent government nor my intentions were to exercise 
the right of reprisal upon the Spaniards, who, having given the title 
of insurgent to all those Americans worthy of the name, had dragged 
them off to infamous execution, or to tortures even more infamous 
and cruel. But, on seeing that these beasts had made a mockery of our 
generous clemency, apparently in the assurance of being able to 
continue with impunity the same sanguinary ferocity even in defeat, 
I then, in order to fulfill the sacred mission entrusted to my care and 
to save the lives of my threatened countrymen, overcame my natural 
sensitivity and sacrificed the sentiments of a pernicious clemency for 
the good of my country. 

Allow me, Your Excellency, to recommend that you read the letter 
of the cruel Zerveriz, the idol of the Spaniards in Venezuela, ad- 
dressed to General Monteverde, in the Gaceta de Caracas , number 3. 
In it, Your Excellency will discover the horrible plans, the consum- 
mation of which had been plotted by these depraved men. Advised 
in advance of their unholy design, which a cruel experience soon 
fully confirmed, I resolved to put in effect a war to the death, in order 
to deprive the tyrants of the incomparable advantage of their organ- 
ized methods of destruction. 1 


1 See Doc. 12 (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


41 

In fact, during the opening campaign of the liberating army in the 
province of Barinas, Colonel Antonio Nicolds Briceno and other rank- 
ing officers were unfortunately taken prisoner. These, to the number 
of sixteen, the barbarous and cowardly Tizcar ordered shot 1 Similar 
scenes occurred at the same time in Calabozo, Espino, Cuman4, and 
other provinces, accompanied by details and abominations so inhuman 
in their enactment that I deem it unworthy of Your Excellency and 
the paper on which this is written to dwell upon them. 

In the fourth number of the Gaceta, Your Excellency can read a 
brief sketch of the ferocious acts in which cruelty regaled itself. The 
mass slaughter carried out in the peaceful village of Aragua by that 
most brutal of men, the despicable Zuazola, is one of those sanguinary 
acts of delirium or frenzy which has degraded humanity on only one 
or two past occasions. 

Men and women, the aged and the young, their ears having been 
cropped off, were skinned alive and then cast into poisoned lakes or 
put to death by slow and agonizing methods. Nature was violated in 
its innocent beginnings when yet unborn babes were destroyed in 
the wombs of expectant mothers by blows or bayonets. 

In the town of San Juan de los Morros, an ordinary farming center, 
the barbarous Antonanzas and the blood-stained Boves provided scenes 
equally agreeable to the Spaniards. Even now, on those unhappy 
fields, bodies may still be seen hanging from the trees. There the crim- 
inal instinct seems to hold its reign of death, and none can come near 
without feeling the furious impulse of an implacable vengeance. 

Venezuela has not been the only dismal theatre of these horrible 
butcheries. Opulent Mexico, Buenos Aires, Peru, and unhappy Quito 
are virtually comparable to vast cemeteries, in which the Spanish 
government has stacked the bones cleft by its homicidal axe. 

Your Excellency can find the substance of how a Spaniard holds 
the honor of his nation in the second issue of the Gaceta . A letter 
of the Reverend Father Vicente Marquetich states that the sword of 
Regules, in battle and by executions, put to death twelve thousand 
Americans in a single year; and he finds the pride of the sailor Ro- 
sendo Porlier to be his undeviating practice of giving no quarter, not 
even to saints, should they confront him in the dress of a rebel. 

I shall not tax Your Excellency's feelings by extending the account 
of the dreadful agonies that Spanish barbarism has imposed upon a 
suffering humanity in order to establish an unjust and humiliating 


1 Briceno, however, had pursued a similar policy of no quarter prior to his 
capture (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


42- 

dominion over the gentle Americans. If only an impenetrable veil 
might forever hide from man's sight the excesses committed by his 
fellow man! Would that we were not compelled by cruel necessity 
to exterminate these foul murderers! 

Kindly place yourself for a moment in our position and state how 
we should act toward our oppressors. Determine, Your Excellency, if 
it is at all possible to guarantee America's freedom while such per- 
sistent enemies still breathe. Lessons learned from bitter experience 
daily urge the adoption of the harshest measures as acts of generosity; 
and I may tell Your Excellency that humanity itself orders them on 
behalf of its gentle demands. 

I have been compelled by my innermost sentiments to be merciful 
with many a Spaniard, and I have generously permitted them to live 
among us in the fullest freedom. They, however, while their heads 
lay unsafe beneath the avenging blade, stirred up the unhappy peo- 
ple; and their newly committed atrocities may very well match any in 
frightfulness. 

In the valleys of Tuy and Tacata, and in the towns of the western 
provinces, where the ravages of civil war might be expected not to 
extend, these villains have already raised pitiful monuments to their 
mad cruelty. Defenseless women, little children, and tremulous old 
folk have been found beaten, their eyes torn out, disemboweled, to 
such an extent that we are led to believe that the tyrants of America 
are not of the human species. 

It would be futile for anyone, on behalf of those confined in our 
prisons, to request a passport to your colony or to any other place 
outside Venezuela. At considerable damage to public peace, we have 
learned the fatal consequences of granting this privilege. For it can 
definitely be said that almost all those who have obtained a passport, 
heedless of the oaths they have taken, have returned to land at 
enemy-held points to join the parties of assassins who harass our de- 
fenseless population. From their prisons they hatch subversive plots, 
undoubtedly more fatal to themselves than to the government, which 
is obliged to employ its efforts more in stemming the fury of ardent 
patriots against these seditioners who threaten their 2ives than in 
thwarting the sinister machinations of the imprisoned. 

What is Your Excellency's opinion? Should the Americans pa- 
tiently await their own extermination, or should they destroy that 
iniquitous race of men, which, while it breathes, works unceasingly 
for our annihilation? 

Your Excellency is not mistaken in supposing that I have senti- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 43 

ments of compassion; the same is true of all my countrymen. We 
could be forbearing with the savages of Africa. But the tyrant Span- 
iards, despite the strongest sentiments of our hearts, force us to take 
reprisal. American justice will always be able, however, to distinguish 
the innocent from the guilty, and Your Excellency may rest assured 
that the innocent will be treated with the humaneness that is due 
even to the Spanish nation. 

I have the honor to be, Sir, with the highest consideration and 
regard, respectfully, Your Excellency's obedient and attentive servant, 

Sim6n Bolivar 


17. To [James Cockburn], Governor of Curacao 
[Blanco y Azpurua, IV, 752] 

Valencia, October 9, 1813. 

Your Excellency: 

On the 2d of this month I had the honor of commenting upon 
the esteemed suggestion of mediation, which, in your letter of Sep- 
tember 4, Your Excellency interposed in behalf of the Spaniards held 
in our prisons. 

In vain have I proposed to the [Spanish] commander of Puerto 
Cabello an exchange of Spaniards for the Americans whom, in dis- 
regard of a sacred agreement, he keeps in irons and chains aboard 
prison ships, subject to forced labor and suffering from hunger and 
every manner of misery. The result has been detention of my emis- 
saries, with no regard for the inviolability of their character and in 
treacherous abuse of the good faith in which they entered that city 
as delegates of peace. 

Your Excellency has probably seen, in some of the printed matter 
that I enclosed in my last letter, the negotiations conducted with 
General Monteverde who constandy refused to effect an exchange 
through which he might save the lives of those Spaniards whom he 
had abandoned, in a contemptible and cowardly fashion, to our 
mercies. Above all, it will astonish Your Excellency to learn that, 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


44 

although I have nearly 4,000 Spaniards in my power, he not only 
rejected the proposal to exchange them for a hundred or more Ameri- 
cans, but he has yet to reply and has shackled my messenger and con- 
signed him to the hardest of labor. 

Notwithstanding these repeated and execrable violations, Your Ex- 
cellency s high intercession, of such great moment for Venezuela, has 
moved me, so to speak, to make a decision respecting the officers 
captured in the recent actions, and to propose their exchange for an 
equal number of Americans of similar rank and character. 

Your Excellency will note the advantages that this proposal gives 
the enemy, since their punishment, by virtue of a previous law, dic- 
tated both by necessity and justice, should be decapitation; whereas 
our men have been buried in dungeons in violation of a solemn agree- 
ment that guaranteed their safety. The American prisoners should be 
set free; the Spanish prisoners should perish. Have the goodness, 
Your Excellency, to judge for yourself which party offers clemency 
and which a cruel obstinacy. Your Excellency cannot but conclude 
that we, being more humane toward the Spaniards than their own 
countrymen, have endeavored to save them. But Your Excellency will 
never be able to believe that they have refused to comply with our 
humane suggestions and have appointed themselves the executioners 
of their brothers. 

These charitable proposals were carried by the presbyter, Salvador 
Garda de Ortigosa, a venerable priest, whose exemplary virtues have 
won the respect of the Spaniards themselves. He went as an emissary 
authorized to treat with the enemy; his purpose was only to benefit 
the enemy officer prisoners and their countrymen. The result of the 
audience given this respectable envoy, and of the gratitude displayed 
by the commander of Puerto Cabello for the interest shown the men 
of his own army was this: the commander imprisoned him in a dun- 
geon, and he escaped with his life only after much pleading and 
weeping. I now entreat Your Excellency to tell me what path of 
salvation remains for us to follow in dealing with these monsters, for 
whom no rights of man exist, no virtue, no honor, no inner prompt- 
ing to halt their wickedness. I have sought to be generous, even to 
the detriment of the sacred interests that I defend; but these barbar- 
ians persist in their cruel practices, even to their own injury. 

I am enclosing the latest bulletins, which will convince you of 
the desperate plight of the Spanish army and of the certainty that 
at any moment their last miserable vestiges will be wiped out. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


45 

I have the honor to be your obedient servant, Your Excellency, 
with sentiments of the highest consideration, 

Sim6n Bolivar 


18. To Manuel Antonio Pulido, Governor of the Province 
of Barinas 

[Blanco y Aspurua, IV, 761] 

Caracas, October 13, 1813. 

To Citizen Manuel Antonio Pulido: 

Nothing could be further from my mind than to increase the sus- 
picions of the zealous advocates of federalism who might attribute 
motives of personal advancement to the measures deemed indispensa- 
ble for the salvation of my country. But when the existence and fate 
of a million inhabitants, and even the emancipation of all America, 
are dependent upon these measures, every consideration must give 
way to so urgent and lofty a purpose. 

I indeed regret that you should repeat the vicious political ideas 
that delivered to a weak enemy an entire republic, powerful in pro- 
portion. 

Review the present campaign and you will find that the very op- 
posite system has reestablished freedom. We should be squandering 
our every effort and sacrifice were we to return to the cumbersome 
and complicated form of government that previously brought us to 
ruin. 

How can small, impotent, and poor cities at this time aspire to 
sovereignty and hope to maintain it? In New Granada, the struggle 
involving claims similar to yours degenerated into a horrible civil 
war which caused American blood to run, and which might have 
destroyed the independence of that vast region but for my efforts in 
effecting a reconciliation and the recognition of a supreme authority. 

Division of power has never established and perpetuated govern- 
ments— only concentration has infused respect. I have not liberated 
Venezuela merely to realize this same [federal] system. Oh, if the 
moment had but arrived when I could transfer my authority to other 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


46 

hands! But, as long as the present danger endures, however strong the 
opposition, I shall carry forward the plan that has afforded me such 
excellent results . . . [torn]. 

If governments should stoop to gratify human ambition and ava- 
rice, remember that there would be no peoples to obey them. It is 
necessary to sacrifice selfish ambitions for the sake of order and 
strength in our administration. And my innovations, which in no way 
exceed the practices of the freest government in the world, shall be 
maintained at all costs, because my duty and responsibility so de- 
mand. 

Bolivar 


19. Address to the Citizens of Caracas 
[Blanco y Azpurua, IV, 763] 

Caracas, October 18, 1813. 
Gentlemen of this Illustrious Municipality: 

Your deputation has presented me with the resolution of the 14th 
instant in which, in the name of the people, you transmit to me the 
just reward for the victories I have won and which have given my 
country its liberty. 1 

I have had, it is true, the honor to lead on the field of battle valiant 
soldiers, able and intrepid leaders, who could by themselves have 
achieved the memorable enterprise which our arms have successfully 
concluded. You acclaim me Captain General of the Armies and Lib- 
erator of Venezuela— a title more glorious and gratifying than the 
sceptre of all the empires on earth. But you should bear in mind that 
the Congress of New Granada, Field Marshal Jose Felix Ribas, Colo- 
nel Atanasio Girardot, Brigadier General Rafael Urdaneta, Major 
D’Eluyar, Major Elias, and the other officers and troops were the true 
illustrious liberators. They, and not I, Gentlemen, merit the awards 
with which, in behalf of the people, you mean to honor me for serv- 

1 The “just reward” was the title of “Liberator,” bestowed upon him by an 
assembly of the principal citizens of Caracas. He consistendy used this title, 
and in Latin America today he is still called by it (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


47 


ices which they have performed. The honor that you do me is so 
superior to my ability that I cannot contemplate it without embarrass- 
ment. 

The Congress of New Granada has entrusted to my feeble efforts 
the reestablishment of our Republic. I have contributed my devotion: 
no danger has deterred me. If this devotion can give me a place 
among the citizens of our nation, the fortunate outcome of the cam- 
paign that my orders have directed is sufficient requital for these serv- 
ices, which every soldier in the army likewise rendered under the 
republican banner. 

Overcome with gratitude, I have read the generous resolution in 
which you, nevertheless, acclaim me Captain General of the Armies 
and Liberator of Venezuela. I realize how much I am indebted to 
your own lofty character and, even more, to the peoples whose will 
you express to me. The law of duty, more powerful in me than the 
impulses of my heart, enjoins me to obey the wishes of a free people. 
It is with the most profound feelings of veneration for my country 
and for you, its spokesmen, that I accept such signal munificence. 

May God keep you many years. 

Sim6n Bolivar 


20. To General Santiago Marino, Commander of the 
Eastern Provinces of Venezuela 

[L etterbook] 

Valencia, November 27, 1813. 

My dear friend: 

I have previously communicated officially to Your Excellency what 
I wrote Colonel Francisco Azcue and Lieutenant Colonel Casimiro 
Isava on the 20th of this month, respecting the time and place in 
which we should begin to discuss the commission Your Excellency 
has intended for them. 

Yesterday I wrote them from the field of Vigirima, six leagues dis- 
tant from this city, where it was necessary for me to go with some of 
my forces to head off the Spaniards from Puerto Cabello, who, num- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


48 

bering twelve hundred, with three pieces of artillery, had hoped to 
reach Guacara and move on to Valencia by that route. Having suc- 
ceeded in routing them completely, for they left behind artillery, lost 
some rifles, and suffered many killed, wounded, and prisoners, I have 
returned to write Your Excellency’s commissioners once again assur- 
ing them that within a week I hope to proceed to San Carlos, seek 
out the enemy, defeat him, and then return to this city to begin our 
negotiations. 

I have in mind what Your Excellency tells me in your esteemed 
letter of the 3d instant relative to providing in our plan for one com- 
mander in the east and another in the west; and it is also understood 
that the provinces of Cumana, Guayana, Barcelona, and Margarita 
are to come under the control of the east. 

On two different occasions I ordered Your Excellency to dispatch 
your land forces to Caracas, La Guaira, and Calabozo, which are 
without garrisons as a result of the Barquisimeto affair. 1 I have rea- 
son to fear subversive activity at these places; but, above all, if Your 
Excellency does not send troops to Calabozo, you may count on the 
enemy to regain possession of that important point. 

I give you again the expression of my sincerest esteem and friend- 
ship and have the honor to be Your Excellency’s friend and humble 
servant, 

Sim6n Bolivar 


21. To General Santiago Marino, Commander 
of the Eastern Provinces of Venezuela 

[ Letterbook ] 

Valencia, December 16, 1813. 

To Citizen General Santiago Marino: 

I have the honor of enclosing, among other papers, Bulletins num- 
ber 25 and 26, which present an incomplete report of the results of 

1 Bolivar’s forces were defeated near the town of Barquisimeto after having 
forced the Spanish to retire from the battlefield. An unordered retreat which 
resulted in panic among the patriot forces was the cause of the defeat (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


49 

the Araure expedition. Over three thousand men of the Spanish 
army killed, captured, or put to flight bring added tribute to the 
glorious triumphs of the Republic. 

The various accounts of the prisoners, compiled later by Colonel 
Villapol, the commander of the right wing, agree that the enemy 
numbered over 3,700 men, of whom 1,400 were cavalry; whereas, in 
Bulletin number 25 we reveal that there were only 3,500 on the 
strength of intelligence previously received in the village of Araure 
proper. They were superior in the number and quality of their cav- 
alry. We, it can be said, had no artillery except two mortars while the 
enemy, on the open plain, made use of ten pieces of cannon, prin- 
cipally four-pounders. Prior to the defeat of our advance guard we had 
been superior in infantry; but following the loss of the advance 
guards muskets, with which the enemy armed their lancers [has- 
tarios J, 1 we entered into a pitched battle with our inferior infantry 
forces. 

Nevertheless, the courage of our troops, raising them above the 
cruel misfortune of the complete destruction of our advance guard, 
caused them to await impatiently the moment when batde would 
begin. The line of battle formed, and they quickly advanced, rapidly 
and in the best of order, notwithstanding the havoc caused by the 
enemy artillery. When we were within firing range, the division com- 
manders ordered fire to be opened simultaneously, at the sound of 
which our infantry attacked with a vigor that the best European 
veterans could not have matched. Finally, our infantry, with fixed 
bayonets, charged the solid Spanish line and routed it so completely 
that their General in Chief, Ceballos, barely succeeded in escaping to 
Coro with only twenty of his men. 

Colonel Villapols division, which was sent to attack Barquisimeto 
from the battlefield, took that city without resistance, capturing a 
well-mounted four-pounder and some muskets. There we encountered 
our officers who, having been wounded in the defeat which we had 
previously suffered before that city, had been taken prisoner. 2 The 
terror with which the Spaniards abandoned all the places that they 
held did not allow them time to think of these brave men, whom they 
had no doubt marked for death. 

1 Soldiers of the ancient Roman legion, chosen after the v elites from among 
the youngest and least wealthy. In the Venezuelan war to the death, because 
of the shortage of rifles, certain corps were armed with stocks, pikes, or spears 
(comp, and ed.). 

8 See Doc. 20 (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


50 

I presume that Your Excellency has received my latest communica- 
tions in which I inform you of the invitations which I have extended 
to your commissioners, Colonel Francisco Azcue and Lieutenant 
Colonel Isava, to come to this city so that the noble purposes which 
Your Excellency has in view for them can be fulfilled. On December 
2, they advised me from Maiquetia of their return to that province, 
having been recalled by events of the first importance. 

The eastern provinces [under your command], as the first fruit of 
victory, might preferably devote themselves to a discussion of what 
form of government would be best suited to Venezuela, one which 
could bring about an immediate correction of her precarious adminis- 
tration and end that uncertain and inconsistent course of various 
forms of government which, by dint of circumstances, have replaced 
one another in the Republic. 

The commissioners, of course, have provided me with the instruc- 
tions that Your Excellency gave them; hence, guided by these, they 
can discuss with me the government that should be adopted. Allow 
me, in replying to you with the military frankness which I must use 
with Your Excellency, to say that it does not appear advisable to me 
to postpone the reestablishment of a central authority for all Venezue- 
lan provinces. It appears proper to me that there should be two mili- 
tary departments, one of the west, the other of the east, in command 
of their present leaders or of those who are either appointed by the 
Supreme Government of Venezuela or chosen by the President of 
the states. The provinces should now elect their representatives to the 
General Assembly, upon whom devolves the appointment of said 
president, who is to hold the supreme command, both for the prov- 
inces [tom] [of the west] and of the east. 

I repeat my declaration, which shall be sacred to me, not to retain 
any authority, even that which the people confer upon me, and much 
less that of supreme head of the state. I have so pledged myself in 
my proclamations, and I will be faithful to my promises. Other than 
the honor of fighting in the field against the enemies of my country, 
in whatsoever office may be given me, I seek no more from the gener- 
osity of the government that is to be established. 

In reward for Your Excellency's sacrifices and for the victories with 
which they have been crowned, I should like you to become the 
President of Venezuela: he who was able to reestablish the Republic 
in the eastern provinces, overcoming obstacles that might have 
daunted the heroism of the best trained generals, is without question 
the man best fitted to maintain the glory of the nation, which, as a 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


51 


result of his efforts, has been liberated. But this nation must present 
itself to the world worthily obedient to a central government that will 
represent it among the other powerful peoples of the world. 

If we establish two independent authorities, one in the east and 
the other in the west, we will create two different nations, which, be- 
cause of their inability to maintain an independent existence, much 
less of taking their place among other nations, will look ridiculous. 
Only a Venezuela united with New Granada could form a nation 
that would elicit from others the decorous consideration due her. 
How can we think of dividing her? Our security and the reputation 
of the independent government impose upon us, on the contrary, 
the obligation of creating one unified nation with New Granada. 
This is now the fervent desire of the Venezuelans and the Granadans, 
and it was on behalf of such a union, so important to both regions, 
that the courageous sons of New Granada came to liberate Venezuela. 
If we unite all within a single consolidated nation, and at the same 
time extinguish the embers of discord, we will further consolidate 
our forces and promote the mutual cooperation of the peoples in sup- 
port of their natural cause. Divided, we shall be weaker, less re- 
spected by enemy and neutral powers alike. Union under a single 
supreme government will be our strength and will make us formida- 
ble to all. 

God keep, etc. 


22. Antonio Munoz T£bar, Secretary of State 
and Foreign Affairs, to Sim6n Bolivar 1 

[Gaceta de Caracas, Nos. 29, 30, January 6, 9, 1814] 

Caracas, December 31, 1813. 

The nation which Your Excellency has just liberated did not exist 
a short time ago. You have caused it suddenly to appear, and from all 

1 This letter, generally entitled “Ideas On the Union of All America,” is a 
report of Antonio Munoz Tebar. It was read to the Congress on January 2, 
1814, in the church of San Francisco. It is addressed to Bolivar, holder of the 
executive power, with whom Munoz T£bar was identified in his political ideas. 
Many ascribe its content to Bolivar (ed.)» 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


52 

sides the eyes of the world are fixed upon it. They must not hope, 
however, to find in the history of your government absolute confor- 
mance with that of those governments whose origins are found in by- 
gone ages. It is easy, when everything one encounters has been 
established, to point to great advances and to attribute to ones self 
before the world the advantages wrought by such earlier accomplish- 
ments. You, however, have had to create everything: empire and gov- 
ernment Your Excellency's glory is not that of being the successor 
to a sovereign rule over a formidable nation, sustained and respected 
by solemn treaties and alliances. You did not find immense treasures 
or an organized army and navy— all this had to be created. Your glory 
is not the glory of Power; it is the glory of Virtue. When the charac- 
ter of your government is discussed, nothing similar to the pompous 
accounts of the governments of Europe will be found. There will be 
no mention of half a million soldiers, of a thousand vessels, of mil- 
lions upon millions in pesos fuertes. 1 But there will be the picture 
reminiscent of Romulus, the father of a people, whose heroism sub- 
jugated the Universe; of Washington and William Tell and of the 
two illustrious republics liberated by their efforts. 

It has been four months since victory placed in your hands the 
sovereign power over the newborn Republic. It has been as many 
months since you generously called me to the ministry, trusting, no 
doubt, that my zeal would supply what I lacked in ability. Your Ex- 
cellency has seen that the best sentiments are of no avail if they are 
not guided by creative genius, which alone can assure great under- 
takings. I will advise you, however, of the state of our principal for- 
eign relations, reserving for a separate report the subject of revenues, 
these being the two important departments whose administration you 
entrusted to me. 

The fortunate exertions of the people of Caracas on April 19 
[1810], ejected Empar&n from our capital. A spontaneous impulse 
led the other provinces to throw off the oppressive yoke of their 
rulers. But the vile habit of slavery, the hardest to destroy, bound 
them to maintain their recognition of the chimerical King of Spain. 
In vain the Federal Congress, on July 5, 1811, declared the inde- 
pendence of Venezuela. That timid hand, which, trembling, ap- 
peared to set the revolution in motion, added greater lustre to our 
abilities, thereby increasing the notoriety of our fall. Hence, it can- 
not be stated that the history of the national government of the Re- 

1 A Spanish silver coin, one ounce in weight, better known as a piece of 
eight (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


53 

public originated in that lamentable epoch. The ancient yoke re- 
turned to bow our necks, and, whereas we had formerly been treated 
as docile slaves, vengeance now heaped upon Venezuela all the ills 
which the evil genius of destruction could devise. 

Several important relationships established during this period, how- 
ever, accord it a place in our political history. This unknown region, 
which spoke to the world in startling terms, captured the attention of 
other nations. England, France, and the United States gave thought 
to us. Her spirit of authority outraged, Spain, by her decrees of July 
30 and August 12, 1810, proclaimed a vigorous blockade around 
Venezuela. Her fury became a laughing-stock, for virtually every 
Spanish vessel that came near our shores fell into our hands. Con- 
sequently, new measures were contrived to subjugate us, and Spain 
dispatched an expedition for the purpose of operating within our 
territory. The enemy's losses in the blockade were fully compensated 
for on the continent. The shameful capitulation proposed by our 
General [Miranda] yielded the entire Republic to the Spanish leader. 
Then a scandalous event occurred, something which is difficult to 
conceive of even now. The doubly superior forces of Miranda sur- 
rendered to Monteverde, who, by virtue of the pact that was con- 
cluded, occupied without resistance the cities and provinces which 
could have contested his victory successfully. 

Great Britain, although an ally of Spain, and pressed by the latter, 
did not heed Spain's ambitious request that she assist her in this war. 
The ministry, on the contrary, unwaveringly observed the principles 
of neutrality and issued strict instructions to all commanders of the 
British forces, in a circular of August 4, 1810, not to meddle in the 
disputes of either party. France announced its recognition of our flag 
and even proffered assistance which never materialized. 

The Congress of the United States passed a resolution on Decem- 
ber 5, 1811, proclaiming that it viewed the emancipation of Vene- 
zuela as a most encouraging event and suggesting to the President 
of those states that he recommend to the other peoples of this part of 
America that they make a like declaration. It was the intention of 
that government to recognize our independence as soon as indepen- 
dence had been proclaimed in New Granada and the other regions 
that were preparing to do so and then to enter into negotiations with 
the independent governments. 

The capitulation of San Mateo reduced all to nought. Venezuela's 
shame might have been eternal, the regrets of those governments 
never-ending, had not your triumphs and the feats of General Marino 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


54 

reestablished the Republic. Your Excellency's indignation was even 
greater following that capitulation, in which the most sacred promises 
that were pledged were trampled underfoot with impious effrontery. 
The Spanish nation, heedless of the voices of honor, still holds Roscio 
and others confined and chained, despite the strongest condemnation 
of the bad faith of this behavior, and despite the appeals made to her 
sense of decency to fulfill these solemn pacts. Your Excellency desired 
to punish the faithlessness of these infractors and to avenge the out- 
raged rights of nations. As the physical means to do so were lacking, 
daring, genius, and celerity have achieved what might be expected 
only of great armies. 

A handful of soldiers, brought from New Granada, victoriously 
conquered the Magdalena [river area], Cucuta, Santa Marta, and 
Pamplona. Still more remarkable, Your Excellency, was your occupa- 
tion, in thirty days, as a result of the swiftness of your operations and 
your glorious triumphs, of the provinces of M6rida, Trujillo, Barinas, 
and Caracas, after defeating the Spaniards in five pitched battles. 
The engagements of Niquitao and Los Horcones, due to the superb 
valor of General Ribas, enabled the standards you commanded to be 
carried to every corner of the land. The victory at Los Taguanes con- 
cluded the campaign. 

Some Spanish troops were still garrisoned at Caracas, La Guayra, 
the towns of the barlovento 1 and the llano regions. Governor Fierro, 
in charge of these forces, proposed, on August 3, 1813, the capitula- 
tion which you granted at La Victoria on the fifth. Without awaiting 
its outcome, the enemy, then situated forty leagues from Valencia, 
where your troops were stationed, scurried headlong to the port; for 
they were less afraid to perish in the waves or on vessels that could 
not carry the weight of so many fugitives than to trust the generosity 
of the victor. The world has never before witnessed so great a reign 
of terror, which causes consternation in cowardly men, as existed 
during those momentous days. La Guayra and Caracas afforded the 
spectacle of terrified, half-naked Spaniards wandering through the 
streets, abandoning their arms, hurling themselves into the sea, and 
fleeing from an enemy not yet visible. This same Governor Fierro 
humbled himself and, in a decree of August 3, replaced the scorn 
with which he had pretended to treat our cause with respect which 
he paid to Your Excellency as the head of the recognized government. 

Although you had occupied the Magdalena, Cucuta, Santa Marta, 


1 Windward or coastal region of Venezuela (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


55 


Pamplona, M&rida, Trujillo, and Barinas, Spanish blood did not run 
except in time of batde. The right of reprisal, however, entitled you 
to execute them all, without distinction. Not only had they violated 
the capitulation of San Mateo, but they had committed unspeakable 
acts of unheard of ferocity, slaughtering, even in the peaceful towns, 
farmers, women, and children, as you yourself have described to His 
Excellency the Governor of Curasao, in your letters published on 
October 4 and 9 of this year. 1 

As you have stated on another occasion, humane sentiments made 
you wish to spare the blood of the evildoers, even though, following 
their defeat, they had hanged Colonel Briceno and other officers un- 
fortunate enough to fall into their hands. If left unpunished for 
their crimes, they would have carried their atrocities to the farthest 
extremes had not the declaration of war to the death terrified them 
and wrested from their hands the enchained victims who were 
to have been sacrificed. 

From that moment, the Republic of Venezuela was recognized by 
all. We awaited only the inevitable surrender of Puerto Cabello, in 
order to rest on our laurels. But Spains determination to destroy us 
then became more apparent than ever, and, when the most powerful 
army yet to confront us arrived at Puerto Cabello from Cadiz, the war 
was renewed with even greater vigor. 

Spanish blood was infamously shed in famous battles, for these 
fresh troops, who, in their proud delirium, had expected to halt the 
swift course of your victories, suffered a painful experience in pursuit 
of their grandiose projects. The remnants of this miserable expedition 
fled to hide their weakness and their shame in the impregnable for- 
tress of San Felipe, where they cannot long withstand the privations 
of a rigorous siege. 

During these brilliant triumphs, Your Excellency lamented the 
obstinacy of the enemy, which obliged you to flood the fields of 
battle with their blood. Even the public interest could not overcome 
your generous sentiments, for the most redoubtable conspirators were 
allowed complete freedom. Most of them promptly reunited and in- 
cited the people to rebel by providing them with arms. Although 
but a handful of troops ignited this civil war, both the area west of 
Caracas and the province of Barinas were enveloped in ruins. A series 
of successes having increased their forces at our expense, this war 
assumed an alarming aspect. You had to fly to the west at the head 


'See Docs. 18 and 19 (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


56 

of your troops where, in the vicinity of Araure, you routed the largest 
army that was to have put us under the Spanish yoke. 

The Republic stood fast. Your Excellency seized this moment to 
display to the world your admirable disinterestedness. In your official 
note of December 19, 1813, to the government of New Granada, you 
strongly urged that the supreme power be placed in other hands, as 
soon as circumstances made it possible to convoke the representatives 
of the people. 

With respect to New Granada it is further revealed that your 
policy has not been solely to strengthen our alliance with her; rather, 
it seeks to make one nation of both regions. Considerations of the 
greatest importance make this step indispensable. The interests of 
New Granada, our own interests, and the ideas of the other govern- 
ments on this particular, adequately manifested, compel Your Ex- 
cellency to work for its accomplishment. Our strength will be bom 
of this union. The enemies of the American cause will tremble before 
so formidable a power, which, united, will be able to resist them on 
every side. Domestic strength and prosperity will ascend to new 
heights when, guided by a single motivation, our resources for power 
and prosperity have been harmonized to create one great political 
unit. In proportion as we thus promote national greatness, we ex- 
tinguish among ourselves any source of conflict, and we prevent the 
recurrence of strife such as that which once afflicted New Granada, 
when her provinces engaged in a civil war which caused their mutual 
destruction and amused the barbarous Spaniard, for he saw his 
enemy lose strength at no expense to him. 

If, in past ignominious centuries, a continent more populous and 
rich than Spain itself was the victim of the perfidious rule of the 
Madrid government; if Spain was able, from a distance of two 
thousand leagues, and with no large forces, to subject America, from 
New Mexico to the Straits of Magellan, to its harsh despotism, why 
cannot a lasting union be effected between New Granada and Vene- 
zuela? And further, why should not all South America be united 
under a single, central government? 

The lessons of experience should not be lost upon us. The specta- 
cle of Europe, bathed in blood, in an effort to restore an equilibrium 
that is continually being unbalanced, should be sufficient to bring 
about a change in our political life, if it is to be saved from those 
bloody perils. If our continent, like that of Europe, were to divide 
into nations, if the American government were to be guided by the 
principles which generally govern the European ministries, we also 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


57 

would experience upsets of continental equilibrium and would spill 
the blood which Europe sacrifices at the foot of her political idol. 

We now find ourselves in the fortunate position of being able, 
without obstacle, to steer our policy in the most expedient direction. 
You, Your Excellency, to whom America looks in victory, are the 
admiration and the hope of your fellow-citizens. You are best fitted 
to unite the will of all the southern regions, to begin at once the 
creation of the great American nation, and to preserve it from the 
evils which have befallen the European system of nations. 

Besides this continental equilibrium which Europe seeks where 
it is least likely to be found, in the embraces of war and turmoil, 
there is another equilibrium, Your Excellency, one of particular 
concern to us— Universal Equilibrium. The ambitions of the nations 
of Europe would carry the yoke of slavery to other parts of the world. 
All these regions of the world should attempt to establish a balance 
between themselves and Europe, in order to destroy the preponder- 
ance of the latter. I call this Universal Equilibrium, and it must 
enter into the calculations of American policy. 

It is essential that the strength of our nation be equal to the task 
of successfully resisting the aggressions which European ambitions 
might instigate. This colossus of power, which must oppose that 
other colossus, can be created only by uniting all South America 
into a single national body. One central government can direct its 
great resources toward a single goal, namely, resistance to all foreign 
attacks, while, domestically, the combined forces of mutual coopera- 
tion will carry us to the pinnacle of power and prosperity. 

These, Sir, are the aspirations of that nation of the north which 
George Washington led to victory. Her policies should be united with 
ours, and our common resources, like an unassailable barrier, should 
be pitted against the ambitions of Europe. The genius and character 
which favor Your Excellency demand that you alone undertake this 
great work. By its accomplishment you will have achieved what no 
other mortal can claim to have done— the creation from its inception 
of the greatest of nations. 

Because the plan is the greatest that the mind can conceive and 
because its realization is of the utmost difficulty, it is all the more 
worthy of you. Truly, even if you were to work with a rapidity 
greater than that of Caesar, or of Napoleon, you could not prolong 
your years for so long a time, however much this time may be 
shortened, in order to place upon this enterprise the seal of com- 
pletion. Nevertheless, you will be able, if the present world situation 


58 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

persists, to lay the indestructible foundations of this great edifice. 

Proceed, then, to carry to fruition the projected union with New 
Granada. This must be the cornerstone of Your Excellency's further 
undertakings, since you cannot now renounce them without depriv- 
ing America of your genius and power. Except for Spain, opposition 
to your rising career is no part of the policy of any nation. The Vene- 
zuelan flag flies the seas, respected and protected by all other flags. 
But you will always fight the Spaniards, for the ministry of the 
Catholic monarchs views the rise of America with greater wrath than 
Spains humiliation at the foot of the invaders throne. The hatred 
they feel for us is unlike any other emotion: it is an all-consuming 
passion; and a malignant envy courses through their veins and gnaws 
at their entrails when they view our achievements. 

Increase your armies; arm all Venezuela; march against the Spanish 
forces wheresoever in America they hold sway. Dispel the claims of 
that fierce nation, our enemy. You have trampled their banners in the 
dust by immortal victories. You can force them to abandon, shame- 
faced and cowering, their violenjt usurpations in America. Their 
armies crushed to earth, their Councils of Cadiz, trembling, will 
recognize in America the law which victory dictates. 

Your Excellency will constantly be concerned with the nature and 
perfection of the public administration, even as you traverse the terri- 
tory and combat the Spanish divisions. The fire of sedition, fed with 
so many fuels, will gradually subside under the gentle flow of your 
judicious measures. Already Your Excellency's conquering troops have 
been sent to castigate rebellious Coro. Fortune will crown this enter- 
prise, as it has all your others, with success; but you must move with 
your accustomed speed against Maracaibo and Guayana. The free- 
dom of these two provinces will be a stepping-stone to freedom for all 
South America, and by endowing it with a just government and fair 
laws Your Excellency's creative genius will make that freedom en- 
during. 

I have the honor of presenting to Your Excellency, as substantiat- 
ing documents, in addition to those mentioned, the official note of 
the commission of the Congress of New Granada, of September 18, 
this year; and that addressed by this ministry to the authority of that 
nation, on August 14 of this year. 

General Headquarters, Caracas, December 31, 1813, the third year 
of Independence and the first year since the war to the death. 

With the greatest respect, I remain Your Excellency’s humble 
servant, 


Antonio Munoz T£bar 


1814 


23. Addresses Delivered before the Caracas Assembly 
[Yanes y Mendoza, I, 111] 

Caracas, January 2, 1814. 

Fellow-Citizens: 

Hatred of tyranny banished me from Venezuela when I saw my 
country enchained for the second time; but love of liberty overcame 
every obstacle in the path which I took to redeem my country from 
the cruelties and tortures of the Spaniard and brought me back from 
the distant banks of the Magdalena. My armies, repeatedly trium- 
phant, have everywhere taken possession and have destroyed the power- 
ful foe. Your chains now shackle your oppressors. The Spanish blood 
that tinges the battlefield has avenged your slain countrymen. 

I have not given you freedom; for this you are indebted to my fel- 
low-soldiers. Behold their noble wounds, which still bleed; recall 
to mind those who have perished in battle. My glory has been in the 
leading of these brave soldiers. Neither vanity nor lust for power 
inspired me in this enterprise. The flame of freedom lighted this 
sacred fire within me, and the sight of my fellow-citizens suffering 
the ignominy of death on the scaffold, or languishing in chains, com- 
pelled me to take up the sword against the enemy. The justice of our 
cause united the most valorous soldiers under my banners, and a 
just Providence accorded us victory. 

My desire to save you from anarchy and to destroy the enemies who 
were endeavoring to sustain the oppressors forced me to accept and 
retain the sovereign power. I have given you laws; I have organized 
for you an administration of justice and finance; in short, I have 
given you a government. 

Citizens, I am not your sovereign. Your representatives must make 
your laws; the national treasury is not the property of him who 
governs you. Every administrator of your interests must render you 
an account of his stewardship. Judge impartially for yourselves 
whether I have used the elements of power for my own advancement, 
or whether I have devoted my life, my thoughts, my every moment 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


6o 

to make of you a nation by augmenting your resources or, rather, by 
creating them. 

I yearn for the moment when I can transfer this power to the 
representatives which you will choose. I sincerely trust, Gentlemen, 
that you will exempt me from an office which not a few of you could 
hold with distinction. Grant me the one honor to which I aspire— 
that of continuing to fight your enemies; for I shall never sheathe 
my sword so long as my country's freedom is not absolutely assured. 

The glory you acquired by expelling your oppressors has been 
beclouded; your honor has been compromised, for you have lost it in 
succumbing to the tyrant’s yoke. You were the victims of a cruel 
vengeance. The interests of the country were in the hands of bandits. 
Judge, therefore, whether your honor has been restored; whether your 
chains have been struck off; whether I have rid you of your enemies; 
whether I have given you justice; and whether I have organized the 
national treasury. 

I submit to you three certified reports by those who have been my 
deputies in exercising the supreme power. The three secretaries of 
state shall report whether or not you have taken your place upon the 
world stage, whether all the nations that deemed your cause lost once 
again gaze upon you to admire the efforts which you are making to 
insure your existence; whether these same nations can refuse to re- 
spect and recognize your national flag; whether your enemies have 
been destroyed as often as they have faced the armies of the Republic; 
whether I, at their head, have defended your sacred rights; whether 
I have employed your treasury in your defense; whether I have taken 
measures to husband and increase it; and whether, on the very field 
of battle and in the heat of combat, I have thought of you and of lay- 
ing the cornerstone of that edifice which will make of you a free, pros- 
perous, and honored nation. It will then be yours to declare whether 
or not the plans which have been adopted can carry the Republic to 
glory and happiness . 1 


I could not, without confusion and embarrassment, hear myself 
termed a hero and made the subject of so many eulogies. Risking my 
life for my country is a duty which has also been performed by your 

1 The reports of the three secretaries of state were then read, and following 
the address by the political governor, Dr. Cristdbal de Mendoza, Bolivar again 
spoke (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


6l 


brothers on the battlefields, and you yourselves, my generous Com- 
patriots, have sacrificed all for freedom. The same sentiments that 
inspire my soul fill yours as well. Providence, not heroism on my 
part, has worked the miracles which you admire. 

When madness or cowardice delivered you to the tyrants, I sought 
to leave this unhappy country. I sought the traitor who had caught 
you in his snare, only to leave you burdened with chains. I witnessed 
the first sacrifices which gave the general alarm. Outraged, I resolved 
to die of misery and despair in the farthest comer of the globe rather 
than be a witness to the excesses of despotism. I fled from tyranny, 
not to save my life, nor to bury it in obscurity, but to risk it on the 
battlefield in search of freedom and glory. Cartagena, over which 
waved the republican banner, was the place I chose for sanctuary. 
That heroic city maintained her rights by force of arms against an 
army of oppression that had already fastened its yoke on most of the 
state. Some of our countrymen and I arrived while the conflict was 
in progress, and, when the Spanish troops were approaching the 
capital and demanding its surrender, the efforts of the caraquenos 
contributed gready to the repulsing of the enemy at every point. 
The thirst for combat, the desire to avenge the outrages upon my 
countrymen, caused me to enlist in those armies, which gained 
signal victories. New expeditions were launched against other prov- 
inces. At that time, in Cartagena, I was a colonel, an inspector, and 
a councillor; yet I asked to serve as a simple volunteer under the 
orders of Colonel Labatut, who was marching upon Santa Marta. 
I scorned rank and distinction. I aspired to a higher privilege— that 
of spilling my blood for the liberty of my country. 

It was then that base rivalries forced me into the most difficult of 
dilemmas. If I obeyed the orders of my commander, I would have 
no opportunity to fight; if I followed my natural inclination, I felt 
certain of taking the fortress of Tenerife, one of the most impreg- 
nable in South America. My pleas to my commander to assign me 
to this undertaking were in vain; hence, I elected to face all the 
dangers and all the consequences. I attacked the fort. Its defenders 
abandoned it to my men, who seized it without resistance, although 
it was capable of withstanding the largest of armies. Five days of 
consecutive victories ended the campaign, and we occupied the 
province of Santa Marta without further resistance. 

This happy outcome obtained for me, from the government of New 
Granada, the command of an expedition against the province [sic] 


62 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


of Cucuta and Pamplona. Nothing there could withstand the vigor of 
the soldiers that I commanded. They defeated and crushed the enemy 
wherever they found him, and the province was free. 

During these triumphs, I longed only for victories that would 
bring liberty to Venezuela— the sole and constant aim of everything 
I did. Difficulties could not deter me: the magnitude of the enter- 
prise was a spur to my ardor. The chains you bore, the outrages you 
suffered inflamed my zeal. Finally, my pleading obtained for me a 
few soldiers and permission to take the field against the powerful 
Monteverde. I then marched at their head and my first steps might 
have discouraged me had I not preferred your welfare to mine. 
Desertions were continual, and my troops had been reduced to a very 
small number when I won my first victories on Venezuelan territory. 

Great armies oppressed the Republic; yet, as you know, Compa- 
triots, a handful of liberating soldiers swept down from New Gra- 
nada upon this capital, leaving a trail of victories behind them. They 
restored Merida, Trujillo, Barinas, and Caracas to their former polit- 
ical status. This capital had no need of our armies to free her. Her 
sublime patriotism had not faded after a year of chains and torments. 
The Spanish troops fled before an unarmed populace, whose valor 
they feared and whose vengeance they had earned. Caracas, great and 
noble in the time of her disaster, covered herself with even greater 
glory by her new resurrection. 

Compatriots, you honor me with the illustrious name of Liberator. 
The officers and soldiers of the army are the true liberators; it is 
they who have earned the gratitude of the nation. You know well the 
authors of your restoration— those valorous soldiers and their daundess 
commanders: General Ribas, whose valor will live forever in the 
memory of America, for his name is linked with the glorious events 
of Niquitao and Barquisimeto; the great Girardot, the youthful hero 
whose heroic death saddens the victory of Barbula; Major General 
Urdaneta, the firmest and coolest officer in the army; the intrepid 
D'Elhuyar, the conqueror of Monteverde at Las Trincheras; the brave 
Major Campo Elias, pacificador of El Tuy and liberator of Calabozo; 
the gallant Colonel Villapol who, although bruised, and weakened 
by a severe fall at Vigirima, lost none of his valor, which contributed 
so gready to the victory at Araure; Colonel Palacios, a fine soldier and 
brave commander who, in a long succession of savage encounters, 
batded on for his country's freedom with great strength of character; 
Major Manrique, who left his soldiers sleeping in camp and made 
his way through the enemy lines with only his officers, Planes, 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


63 

Monagas, Canel6n, Luque, Fernandez, Buroz, and a few more whose 
names escape me but whose courage and prowess are immortalized in 
Niquitao, Barquisimeto, Barbula, Las Trincheras, and Araure. 

Compatriots, I have not come to oppress you with my victorious 
arms. I have come to bring you the rule of law. I have come with the 
intention of safeguarding your most sacred rights. Military despotism 
cannot insure the happiness of a people, nor can the supreme com- 
mand conferred upon me be of more than temporary advantage to 
the Republic. A victorious soldier earns no right to rule his country. 
He is not the arbiter of her laws or government; he is the defender 
of her freedom. His glories must blend with those of the Republic, 
and his ambition must be satisfied with contributing to the happiness 
of his country. I have vigorously defended your interests on the field 
of honor, and I promise that I shall uphold them to the last day of 
my life. Your honor, your glory will be ever dear to my heart; but the 
weight of authority burdens me. I beg you to relieve me from a 
task which is beyond my strength. Choose your representatives, your 
statesmen, and a just government; and be assured that the armies that 
have saved the Republic will forever protect Venezuela's liberty and 
national honor. . . . 

The speakers have spoken for the people; citizen Alzuru has spoken 
for me. Their sentiments must gladden all republican hearts. Citizens, 
you urge in vain that I continue to exercise indefinitely the authority 
that I possess! The popular assemblies throughout Venezuela cannot 
convene without danger. I am aware of this situation, my Countrymen, 
and I will comply with my own feelings in choosing the law which 
circumstances impose upon me; but, I will act as the trustee of su- 
preme authority only until this danger ceases. Thereafter, no human 
power shall make me take up the sceptre of despotism that necessity 
now thrusts into my hands. I promise you that it shall not oppress 
you, but that it shall pass into the hands of your representatives the 
moment they can be assembled. 

I shall not usurp an authority that is not mine. I proclaim to all 
the people: No one can hold your sovereignty except by violent and 
unlawful means. Flee from that country where one man exercises all 
the power, for it is a land of slaves. You call me Liberator of the 
Republic; I shall never be her oppressor. My private sentiments have 
been in utter conflict with my authority! Believe me, my Country- 
men, this is a more painful sacrifice for me than the loss of life itself. 

I confess that I long impatiently for the day when I can relinquish 
my authority. Then I hope you will excuse me from every duty ex- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


64 

cept that of fighting your battles. You possess distinguished citizens 
who are more deserving of your votes than I to exercise supreme 
power. In General Marino, the liberator of the eastern provinces, 
you behold a proper leader, worthy of guiding your destinies. 

Compatriots, I have done everything for my country's glory. 
Permit me, then, to do something for my own. But, until peace 
reigns throughout the Republic, I shall not abandon the helm of 
state. 

I beg you not to think that my modesty is meant to deceive you, a 
device by which I might impose tyranny upon you. I swear to you 
that my words are wholly sincere. I am not like Sulla, who brought 
his country tears and blood; I desire to imitate that dictator of Rome 1 
whose purity of motives led him to relinquish the supreme power and 
to return to private life, submitting everything to the rule of law. 

I am not a Pisistratus who by cajolery would gain your votes, 
affecting a pretended modesty unworthy of a republican, but more 
unworthy still of a defender of his country. I am a plain citizen who 
prefers the freedom, glory, and well-being of his fellow-citizens to 
personal aggrandizement. Accept, then, my sincerest expressions of 
heartfelt gratitude for the spontaneous acclaim with which you have 
named me your dictator. And, in taking leave of you, I promise that 
the general will of the people shall ever be my supreme law, and that 
the people's will shall guide me in all my actions, even as the object 
of my efforts shall be your glory and your freedom. 


24. To Sir Richard Wellesley 
[Copy] 2 

General Headquarters, Maracay, January 14, 1814. 
Sir: 

I have always kept in mind the request you made of me as I was 
leaving London. You expressed to me an eager desire to learn about 
events in this part of the world, where, at that time, a humanitarian 

^incinnatus (ed.). 

* Copied from the original located in England by the Marques de Rojas: 
Sim6n Bolivar (Paris, 1883), p. 107 (comp.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 65 

revolution was about to begin. To date, however, there has been noth- 
ing of note to warrant my writing you. 

The reconquest of Venezuela by her former tyrants was a lamen- 
table disaster; shame prohibited me from writing you about it, and 
you, with your love for our independence, could only have learned of 
it with regret 

After I had witnessed the treachery of the Spanish government, 
which signed the capitulation of San Mateo, guaranteeing immunity 
of persons regardless of past acts or political opinions, and then dis- 
gracefully violated that pledge, I fled a country where tyranny had 
again assumed control. The very ones whom the treaty expressly 
protected were imprisoned in forts and guardhouses, reduced to the 
most extreme misery under the very eyes of the Cortes and the 
Regency. 

While this plan of wholesale destruction was being put into execu- 
tion, fortune sent me a royalist passport which enabled me to escape 
the fury of the storm. I proceeded to Curasao, and from there quickly 
to Cartagena, whose brave inhabitants were striking a blow for inde- 
pendence and against Spanish aggression. It was a moment of crisis 
for that city, as enemy bands had overrun the province and were on 
its outskirts. 

I enlisted under the republican banners, which won victory after 
victory, and I was in command of some of the later expeditions, as 
a result of which the government of New Granada supplied me with 
four hundred soldiers and permission to free Venezuela. 

Venezuela had now suffered ten months of subjugation. 

Picture to yourself the tyrannical system of the Spanish govern- 
ment, the cruelty of the individual Spaniard, the general thirst for 
vengeance and the private resentments of individuals, and you can 
then imagine the sorry plight of my unhappy country in those dis- 
tressing days. Truly, she was suffering a mortal agony. 

The dungeons swallowed entire towns. In them, heaped one upon 
the other, lay Venezuelans weighted with chains, existing on vile and 
miserable rations, and left to die in tombs which a pervert art had 
sealed against light and air. The cities were deserted. No one was to 
be seen but the soldiers of the tyrant, who ignored the tears of the 
wives and mothers; the few surviving men lived in the deepest forests, 
where they had fled the minions of oppression. 

It should be clear to you now that despotism had assailed every walk 
of life. These captives and fugitives were our farmers, our merchants, 
and our artisans. 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


66 

There was no revenue— pillage took its place. The peasantry had 
vanished; their huts were burned. Villages large and small were re- 
duced to ashes. Such property as could not be plundered was confis- 
cated and the embezzlements of trustees, to whom everything had 
been abandoned, completed the general ruin. 

All this was but a prelude to more heinous crimes. Never before 
had such bloody sights been witnessed as those which occurred at 
San Juan de los Morros, where the peaceable inhabitants were nearly 
all killed in the streets, in their homes, or in the woods where they 
had sought refuge— cruelties perpetrated personally by some of the 
most notable Spanish commanders. 

Even as I was approaching Venezuela, blood had begun to flow 
upon the scaffolds, and the assassin’s knife to descend upon its vic- 
tims in the quiet of their homes. 

The town of Aragua de Barcelona, the capital city of Barcelona, 
and the cities of Calabozo and Espino had been witnessing human 
slaughter day after day when the troops under my command, fierce 
as eagles and faster in their marches, poured in upon all sides and 
rescued the intended victims. In little more than a month, Venezuela, 
which previously had presented so desolate a picture, thronged once 
more with her liberated sons; Nature and man were again alive in the 
cultivated fields and in the populous towns. 

The chains that had bound Americans now conquered the fury of 
the oppressor. General Marino, in eastern Venezuela, who, with 
forty men, had launched a most daring plan, succeeded in routing 
Monteverde in a great battle on the famous field of Maturin. 

The island of Margarita, unarmed and with its leading inhabitants 
in prison, dared to withstand the tyrant and his troops and later 
assisted the victors of Maturin, who at the time were completing the 
liberation of the eastern provinces. 

My first efforts were no less successful. I had marched at the head 
of four hundred soldiers and entered Venezuela with less than three 
hundred. Nevertheless, in five pitched battles, this handful of men 
was able to destroy an army of ten thousand and free the provinces 
of Merida, Trujillo, Barinas, and Caracas. From the proud Spaniards 
I then wrested humiliating terms which have yet to be executed. Not 
only did the [Spanish] government of Caracas propose a shameful 
surrender, but, in a pronouncement published August 3 of last year, 
it recognized us as a legitimate government. 

At the time of these successes, no great armies were in the field. 
Many Spaniards had fled with the fruits of their plunder, which 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 67 

they termed the public revenues; there was no navy, and Spain was 
actually preparing to defend her tyrannical rule. 

The most astounding evidence of this malicious obstinacy was seen 
only a few days later when the greatest expedition ever sent against 
Venezuela arrived from Cadiz. Our few, or rather non-existent, forces 
obliged me to be simultaneously on the battlefield and in charge of 
the government. I was obliged to create our forces and to direct them 
as well. And thus you see me, of necessity, both a chief of state and 
a general of the army. 

Our troops distinguished themselves daily in brilliant victories. The 
Spanish expedition has been reduced to a miserable remnant which 
cannot hold out much longer in the impregnable fortress of Puerto 
Cabello, for it is unable to resist the rigors of a close siege by land and 
a fleet blockade of Cumana and La Guaira. 

The armies of Yanez and Ceballos, the largest to invade Vene- 
zuela, suffered a still worse fate. On the memorable field of Araure 
they were totally destroyed. They had been formed in Coro, the 
western part of the province of Caracas, and in San Fernando de 
Apure, with the help of the arms they had received, reinforcements 
from Guayana, as a result of the seditious sentiments which the 
Spaniards had aroused in those towns that I had generously left at 
liberty. 

Although in the beginning the losses we suffered weakened us and 
strengthened their army, the latter has now ceased to exist. What 
happened in Venezuela was what I had always predicted, namely, 
that if England did not support our cause a civil war would break 
out among us, which only a public declaration by Great Britain 
could stop. 

I continue to exercise the supreme power. I assure you, however, 
it is not my intention to place myself above my fellow-citizens. I long 
for the moment when I can convene an assembly of the people, in 
order to relinquish my power into its hands. On the 3d of this month, 
in a popular assembly which I decided to call, I gave an account of 
my operations and submitted the reports of the three secretaries of 
state. I also addressed the assembly and concluded my speech by 
resigning my authority. 

The speakers and people present w r ould not hear of this decision, 
and I consented to continue as commander in chief until such time 
as the enemy should be destroyed and I could return to private life. 
But I refused all civil authority, even if conferred upon me by the 
people themselves. 


68 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


I am reporting to you only sketchily on these truly extraordinary 
events, but, as the principal items have been fully reported in our 
press, I am taking the liberty of sending you their accounts for you 
to peruse at length. 

Permit me, meanwhile, to ask you to pay my respects to your father, 
His Lordship, the Marquess of Wellesley, who favored me with his 
especial kindness during the time when I resided in London. Permit 
me to add my feeble voice to yours and to his in sincere rejoicing at 
the immortal triumphs of the great Duke of Wellington. His fame 
is no more precious to you and your illustrious father than it is to 
me, for I am interested in the fortunes of England and moved by 
the most sincere affection for your exalted house. The memory of 
these victories will endure with the world, and I applaud them the 
more as I believe they will favor American independence. 

Although these victories also assure the independence of Spain, the 
government of St. James, bent as always upon the liberation of 
America, will accord her its protection; and the Lord Marquess of 
Wellesley, a great power in the government of your nation, will be 
inclined to favor a cause as just as ours. 

It was my intention from the first to send special agents to His 
Britannic Majesty, but I thought it best to await the time when our 
destiny seemed certain before soliciting the friendship and aid of the 
powerful nation of which you are one of the principal figures. 

I am, with the highest respect and esteem, your obedient servant, 
Q.B.S.M. 1 

SIMON BOLIVAR 


25. Proclamation to the People of Venezuela 
[ Original ] 

Puerto Cabello, January 28, 1814. 

SIMON BOLIVAR, Liberator of Venezuela, General in Chief of 
her Armies, and Member of the Order of the Liberators, etc., etc. 

On December 7, 1813, I issued an amnesty in favor of the unwary 
souls, who, having been deceived by the Europeans or prompted by 


*Que besa sus wanos— literally— who kisses your hands (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 69 

their own unchecked passions, had jointly or individually taken up 
arms against the cause of independence, giving them a period of one 
month in which to surrender. I now extend the aforementioned par- 
don and general amnesty to include the bandits and other persons, 
Americans, Spaniards, and Canary Islanders, who for any reason 
have borne arms against the Republic, as well as deserters, whatever 
the date of their desertion, provided that all concerned shall present 
themselves, either with or without their weapons, to their chiefs or 
magistrates; and I further declare said amnesty to be unlimited so 
that, at any and all times, those who have been, are, or believe them- 
selves to be delinquent, may so present themselves. I therefore order 
all military, civil, and political leaders under no circumstances to 
execute, to threaten death, or to treat arbitrarily any individual who 
should voluntarily surrender, regardless of nationality, status, or con- 
dition. All persons shall be duly apprised of this summons, as well as 
of that previously issued, which ordered the execution, without fail, 
of every individual apprehended bearing arms or engaging in acts of 
conspiracy. 

Issued at General Headquarters, Puerto Cabello, this 28th day of 
January, 1814, the 4th year of Independence and the 2d year of the 
War to the Death. 

Signed by my hand and countersigned by the Secretary of War 
and of the Navy. 

SIMON BOLfVAR 

Tom&s Montilla, Secretary of War 


26. On the Policy of England 1 
[Gaceta de Caracas , February 7, 1814] 

The battle of Leipzig has at last produced the decision of a long- 
drawn contest in which the larger interests of the continent of Europe 
and the cause of the Independence of Nations have triumphed over 
the ambition of Bonaparte, overturning that immense colossus of 


1 This article was written by Bolivar and sent to the editor of the Gaceta de 
Caracas for publication (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


70 

French power. Of the half million Frenchmen who set out to de- 
molish the coalition of the powers, only fifty thousand have man- 
aged to survive. The great army, the invincible eagles, the great 
marshals have virtually disappeared. The days of October 17, 18, 19, 
and 20, of the year 1813, will remain the most memorable in all the 
history of Europe, for during those days was won the liberty of the 
world, which had been threatened with invasion by the common op 
pressor. 

Let America rejoice in the triumph of the allied armies, which have 
so gloriously defended the cause of independence. Let her cease to fear 
plans which Spain is in no position to carry out. The war has ex- 
hausted Spains treasury; and the gains won from the French, while 
they may increase her territorial possessions, cannot give her the navy 
which she lacks and without which her threats against us need not 
be taken seriously. On the other hand, the preponderance that the 
great successes of the Duke of Wellington and of the allies give 
Great Britain over the affairs of Spain will eventually destroy the 
latters schemes against the independence of the New World. Let 
none fear lest that powerful nation which, even in adversity, has 
persistendy defended the independence of Europe, should fail to 
defend that of America, if attacked. Let us, on the contrary, rejoice 
in the irresistible ascendancy that England is about to assume over 
both hemispheres in guarantee of universal freedom. 

Our industry, hitherto of no value, and our lagging agriculture will 
shake off their apathy in response to the rewards afforded the farmer 
by the rise in the prices of the products he cultivates. Once the 
ports of continental Europe are thrown open to British vessels, our 
farmers will export our coffee, cacao, indigo, cotton, and the like, 
which are in great demand. Maritime commerce having been so long 
suppressed wherever the Napoleonic influence has extended, Europe 
has suffered the want of products which have become as primary a 
necessity for them as their exports are for us. This trade is the founda- 
tion for the prosperity of our commerce and agriculture. 

The policies and the mercantile interests of England and Spain 
are diametrically opposed with respect to America. Spain, unable to 
keep us tranquilly enslaved, is now bent upon our destruction; Eng- 
land, favoring our independence, is interested in our prosperity. The 
northern and southern regions of the New World are determined to 
maintain their freedom at all costs. Even if Spain were to dispatch 
the most powerful of armies, only mutual destruction could possibly 
result, for they could never conquer us. England would not tolerate 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 71 

an odious and, at best, futile war which, offering no hopes for Spain, 
could only devastate this fair half of the earth. 

Yet, where are those armies? Is Spain perchance anything more 
than a phantom nation? With what resources can she raise these 
armies and transport them a distance of two thousand leagues, in 
order to wage a war as long as it would be hopeless? Spain is even less 
powerful since she repelled the French. Her efforts were those of a 
dying man, who, having made them, relapses into greater weakness. 

England, appropriately, is today supporting Spain. In England's 
shadow, America can assert her freedom. England, by her influence 
over the one nation, ends the plans of vengeance and extermination 
that inspire it; and, at the same time, by her victories over thwarted 
France, she eliminates the last of Napoleons designs against us. With 
Spain a vassal state, the Emperor of the French would not have re- 
nounced the rights that he had claimed over America, a dependency 
of Spain. On the contrary, his unbounded ambition would have 
sought, in the integrity of Spanish monarchy, a pretext for claiming 
dominion over both Spain and America. 

As Spain cannot afford to be cut off from her exclusive trade with 
America, she comes into conflict with the major interests of Great 
Britain, and this point of conflict, especially, is one on which neither 
wishes to yield. Throughout the close alliance with England, the 
Spanish government has steadfastly refused to grant England trade 
with America, and England fully realizes that she will never obtain 
such trade with America, insofar as this trade depends upon Spain. 
As free commerce in our ports is the very foundation of English na- 
tional power, it is of the greatest interest to her; and she will be con- 
strained effectively to oppose Spanish domination, which operates 
directly against that interest. 

Thus, while at Donnewitz [Donawitz] and at Leipzig, Russia, 
Austria, Prussia, and Sweden fought with heroic ardor to preserve 
their own independence and to break the degrading yoke forced 
upon Europe, they were likewise defending the sacred rights of the 
New Continent, thus generously spilling their blood on behalf of the 
common cause of the entire world. 


7* 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


27. To Narciso Coll y Prat, Archbishop of Venezuela 
[ Original ] 

Valencia, February 8, 1814. 

Most Reverend Sir: 

I have just read your confidential letter wherein Your Reverence 
tenders your good offices, which I most highly esteem, on behalf of 
the Spaniards whom I have ordered shot. This is a sacrifice no less 
painful to me than to Your Reverence. Only my country's well- 
being, which so imperiously demands it, could bring me to this deci- 
sion. Did I not see that in this instance indulgence would increase the 
number of victims and defeat the very sentiments of pity that move 
Your Reverence to intercede, I should on this occasion gladly give 
you evidence of my desire to comply with your wishes. But Your 
Reverence must comprehend the harsh necessity in which our cruel 
enemies have placed us. In the earlier siege of Puerto Cabello, they 
so exposed our prisoners as to make them the inevitable victims of our 
fire. They have now repeated this same abomination, and, when we, 
in reprisal, put Spanish prisoners in the line of their fire, they im- 
mediately executed four of our men whom they had in their hands. 
What benefit have we gained from holding their men prisoners and 
even from freeing a large number of them? The answer is that yes- 
terday they entered Tinaquillo and murdered twenty-five of its 
garrison, not sparing one. Boves has not yet given quarter to a single 
one of our men taken prisoner. Your Reverence will be horrified 
to learn that Boves sacrifices men and women without distinction. 
To avenge my country and to curb the rage of its destroyers, I am 
compelled to adopt the severe measure that has come to Your Rever- 
ences notice. One such monster less reduces by one the number of 
those who have sacrified, and would continue to sacrifice, hundreds 
of victims. The enemy, seeing us implacable, will at least know that 
he will pay the penalty for his atrocities, and that he will no longer 
have impunity from punishment to encourage him. 

Nothing would make me happier than to share Your Reverences 
views respecting this matter and to yield to my own humane senti- 
ments. But the welfare of my country imposes upon me the imperious 
command to adopt retaliatory measures. Your Reverence may rest as- 
sured that compassion itself demands them, as small sacrifices now 
will obviate greater ones in the future. 

I beg Your Reverence to avail yourself of my decided wish to 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


73 

serve you, insofar as the public welfare for which I am responsible 
permits. 

Your devoted servant and friend, who kisses Your Reverences 
hand, 

SIMON BOLIVAR 

[In the margin ] From Bolivar, received February 8, 1814, the same day 
that I sent him my appeal. 


28. Antonio Munoz Tebar, Secretary of Foreign 
Affairs to Vicente Salias 1 

[Gaceta de Caracas , February 28, 1814] 

General Headquarters, San Mateo, February 22, 1814. 

Citizen Vicente Salias, Editor, Gaceta de Caracas: 

Numbers 29 and 40 of the publication which you edit contain 
notices, both official and private, which have displeased the Liberator. 
Specifically, these are an [editorial] note and a letter from a foreigner, 
which reflect unjustly upon His Excellency, the Governor of the 
island of Curasao, and which are forgetful of the considerations due 
a leader of his character and a citizen of the British nation. The 
foreigner asserts in his letter that the Governor has assisted the be- 
sieged town of Puerto Cabello, while you severely censure him in 
your editorial, whereas the authentic facts which, although unjustly, 
furnish you with the evidence for your comments should, were you 
impartial, require you instead to refute this and other calumnies, the 
falseness of which is apparent at a glance. 

To accuse the Governor of Curasao for having saluted Monteverde 
by salvos of artillery is not only incorrect in the terms in which it is 
stated but is, moreover, a gross absurdity. This practice is a require- 
ment of all the rules of the civilized world; it is the established cus- 
tom of nations to accord to foreign military leaders and diplomatic 

1 Although not bearing Bolivar's signature this letter is included because it 
is written in his name and because of the paucity of documents for this period 
(comp, and ed.). 


74 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

envoys the honors which are their due. Under these circumstances, 
the Governor, in according them to a Spanish general, did no more 
than carry out the duty vested in him by his authority. To insinuate 
that rather than these honors Monteverde should have been given a 
court martial for not having defended Venezuela, is a reproof which 
could more properly be addressed to the Spanish nation, which must 
judge his conduct, and not to a leader of the British nation, who can 
only be guided by his visitors rank. 

You also tell the public that Marshals Soult and Suchet united 
could have defeated the Duke of Wellington. This statement is also 
devoid of foundation and absurd, for a meeting of the French mar- 
shals was impossible. At best they themselves could have come to- 
gether [but not their armies]. Other errors and other unwarranted 
statements observed in the above-mentioned issues warranted the 
decision of the Liberator to suppress a publication which by continu- 
ing in this vein would only serve to injure us in the public eye 
rather than to depict the true spirit of the government. He has, 
however, resolved: 1. that no official document whatever shall be 
inserted in the gazette unless sent to you by the Secretariat of State 
accompanied by a special order communicated by the Liberator for 
its publication; 2. that no news be published respecting the war on 
either continent unless based upon official documents and not upon 
rumors or private information; 3. that the gazette make no comment 
respecting the proceedings of other governments except after consulta- 
tion with the aforementioned Secretariat of State, and with the 
prior approval of the Liberator, lest the customs and principles which 
govern nations be made the subject of attack. 

This does not mean that freedom of the press is curtailed or that 
the government questions the propriety of your gazette. You are 
entitled to express therein whatever opinions you may wish, as long 
as they do not compromise the credit of the Republic by ridiculing 
the authorities of those nations most deserving of respect. 

Moreover, as we are reduced to this single publication to bring our 
cause before the world, it is essential that it represent us faithfully 
and not distort us, thereby damaging the opinion formed of us. 

I am communicating the foregoing to you in accordance with the 
instructions of the Liberator, for due observance and for insertion in 
the said gazette. 

May God keep you many years. 


Antonio Munoz T£bar 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


75 


29. Proclamation to the People of Venezuela 
[Copy] 

Caracas, May 6, 1814. 

SIMON BOLIVAR, Liberator of Venezuela, General in Chief of her 
Armies, and Member of the Order of Liberators, etc., etc. 

Compatriots! 

The war becomes more cruel, and hopes for an early victory, with 
which I encouraged you, have vanished. Our own brothers, united 
by centuries of slavery to our tyrants, delay, God knows till when, 
the day of liberation. The army has done its part: valiant, disciplined, 
loyal, it has everywhere given demonstrations of its courage and com- 
petence. It was not within its power to change in a day habits in- 
grained for centuries. 

Soldiers! If God tries us with so many difficulties and misfortunes, 
he is not abandoning us; he would have us achieve by our own efforts 
and virtues what for other peoples would mean the work of ages. 

One more effort, Venezuelans, and we shall destroy the enemies 
of our country. 

We witness terrible times: blood flowing in torrents; three cen- 
turies of culture, enlightenment, and industry wiped out; on all sides 
the ruins of Nature or of war. It would appear as if every hardship 
had descended upon our unhappy peoples. 

By their very excess we know, however, that these times must end. 
The valor of the army and the unquenchable patriotism of the 
citizens are a promise of new victories. General Headquarters, Cara- 
cas, May 6, 1814. 


Sim6n Bolivar 


j 6 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

30. Thoughts on the Present State of Europe, 
with Relation to America 1 

[Gaceta de Caracas , June 9, 1814] 

At last, the second of the two great problems that have caused the 
flow of so much blood on the European continent appears to be ap- 
proaching a solution. Since the continental system of Napoleon was 
destroyed when the present coalition of the north erected an im- 
penetrable barrier against his power, there only remains to be seen 
whether he who established that system and briefly maintained it by 
extremes of outrage and violence is to remain tranquilly on the 
throne of France. 

Interests of the most complex character have powerfully influenced 
these important transactions. On the one hand, the allies, it appears, 
sought only to check the power of France to the point of freeing 
themselves from the dictatorial and imperious tone with which her 
agents addressed the other courts; while, on the other hand, the 
English government, whose keen foresight could not foresee any- 
thing good from the French caudillo, was determined not to end 
the conflict until the empire that he had erected upon the ruins of 
the Republic had been completely razed. The first of these intentions 
is clearly revealed in the public declaration of Frankfort, and the 
second may be regarded as certain from the results obtained by the 
visit of Lord Casdereagh to the General Headquarters of the Allies. 

According to the latest advices, we are assured that Great Britain 
has completely triumphed over her enemies. A combination of cir- 
cumstances, perhaps unforeseen by the allies, has carried them in 
triumph into Paris, where the inhabitants have received them more 
as deliverers than as conquerors. An event so astonishing must, with- 
out doubt, be the harbinger of general peace, for the white cockade 
frequently seen in the streets of that affluent capital shows a positive 
determination [on the part of the people] to entrust themselves to 
the discretion of the former dynasty. 

Turning our eyes now toward this vast continent, let us weigh 
the consequences that these European events may have in store for 
us. If the continental Europeans, weary of so many political experi- 
ments, return to what they previously rejected as evil; if, rueful of 
so many errors and excesses, they seek to restore all that formerly 


1 The tone and scope of this article are Bolivar's, even though his signature 
is lacking (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


77 

existed, they may well stifle our political existence in its cradle. Some 
say that the Bourbons are returning to gain their lost influence; if so, 
their family alliances will multiply the number of our enemies and 
end all that we have accomplished. 

But it is very easy to convince some men, especially those who 
choose to interpret events according to their personal inclinations, 
that the current European situation particularly favors our best in- 
terests and is, therefore, the very one to help consolidate our liberty 
and independence promptly. 

To be sure, neither the interests of the princes or ruling families, 
nor those of any one nation alone determine the course of European 
politics. These are usually only secondary causes which merely con- 
tribute to the furthering of primary interests; we often see flare up, 
on pretext of avenging a wrong done to one sovereign and for the 
benefit of another, a war that injures the well-being of his people. 

The so-called rights of the Bourbons, about which the English 
long have had so much to say, have been nothing more than the 
ostensible objects of their policy. The real aim of this policy is to 
establish English maritime preponderance by destroying the immense 
power which sooner or later might result in its ruination. The dili- 
gence with which they have proceeded to dissolve whatever coali- 
tions were formed against Spain clearly demonstrates the true object 
of their concern. But, to their good fortune, the man who controlled 
the continent was the one best calculated to bring about theii 
triumph in a most rare and extraordinary manner. Bonaparte's des* 
potism and arbitrariness is the motif they have adopted in order to 
achieve this victory. 

One of the necessary consequences of this new order of things 
will be the reestablishment of the political balance of power among 
the nations of the continent. I say among these nations, because such 
an equilibrium does not now exist, nor can it come into existence for 
a long time with respect to Great Britain. Great Britain has won her 
maritime supremacy in glorious battles brought on by the disorders 
of Europe; and it cannot be imagined that she will, by a display of 
extraordinary disinterestedness not to be found in British history 
where commercial interests have been involved, now voluntarily place 
herself on a par with the other nations that previously were her 
equals in naval power. 

American independence, therefore, owes its first advances to this 
balance of power. France aided North America with troops and war- 
ships, not out of philanthropy or for love of the American people, 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


78 

but because it became necessary that she, having lost her holdings 
in Canada, deprive her rival of the other provinces of the north and 
thereby reduce Great Britain’s weight in the balance of power. Other- 
wise, why should France have set such a fatal example for her 
colonial possessions? How could Spain herself have acquiesced as 
she did, in what the ministry of Saint-Cloud was doing in that 
regard? But England, on her part, fomented the insurrection of 
Santo Domingo, and her plans to grant liberty to the Spanish 
colonies have long been known. 

If we agree, then, as we must, that even with the establishment 
of this new European balance of power, the interests of Great Britain 
are entirely opposed to those of the continental powers, who can be 
so mad as to believe that, with England today the first maritime 
nation of the world, she would support a renewed effort of Spain 
to assert her control in America? Even assuming that Spain should 
conclude with Great Britain treaties favorable to her commerce, 
would the mere pledge of these treaties be a sufficient guarantee of 
their observance? 

It is not necessary to know the far-sighted genius of the British 
Cabinet in order to entertain such conjectures. Now that the power 
of Bonaparte has been destroyed, could not another leader be found 
to oppose Britain’s predominance? Perhaps Emperor Alexander, who 
today has put himself at the head of the Holy Alliance in order to 
destroy that power, will tomorrow promote a continental coalition, 
more powerful than any formed in the past. Amidst such vicissitudes 
of European politics, will England wish to see America the perma- 
nent dependency of some continental power, thereby adding Ameri- 
can wealth and population to the reserves of the power that may 
resist her? 

For this reason the emancipation of America has always entered 
into the calculations of the English Cabinet. Great Britain, situated 
between the old continent and the new, will, by virtue of this new 
universal equilibrium, attain the ultimate in greatness and power, 
to which no people of the world have ever dared aspire. 

The remaining question of control of the seas is for profounder 
analysts to ponder. We can only envision for the future a Great 
Britain, perplexed and bowed under the enormous weight of her 
wealth, forming, with America, the most powerful empire on earth. 

Our revolution, on the other hand, has made such significant 
strides that it cannot be crushed by force. Mexico, Peru, Chile, 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


79 

Buenos Aires, New Granada, and Venezuela, today, through the 
identity of their principles and sentiments, constitute a formidable 
league which cannot be destroyed, despite the intention of its 
enemies. 

If we had to consider the fate of these areas separately, we might 
calculate differendy. Let it be a great consolation to us to know that 
any outrage committed against the smallest segment of Colombian 
soil will be avenged by an endless number of brother peoples spread 
over this new hemisphere. 

But let us suppose that Europe as a whole should wish to subju- 
gate us. In this case, it is necessary to assume that civil war will 
cause even greater havoc throughout our continent and will destroy 
whatever industries and arts it may have cultivated during the past 
three centuries. To admit the possibility of such an episode is to 
overlook the extent to which the wealth and the products of the New 
World have influenced the customs and the politics of Europe. Prop- 
erly understood, it is to the interests of all nations, and particularly 
to the British, to expedite the channels of commerce and to prevent 
a war that would consume the resources which could materially de- 
velop their industry. 

America, moreover, is fortunately situated, for she does not in- 
spire apprehension in those who thrive on commerce and industry. 
For a long time to come, we cannot be anything but an agricultural 
people capable of supplying the markets of Europe with the most 
valuable products. The agricultural group, therefore, is the one best 
calculated to promote friendly relations with merchants and manu- 
facturers. With our independence recognized, and with our coun- 
tries opened to all foreigners without discrimination, we can hardly 
foresee how rapidly public demand will increase from year to year. 
Articles of export will increase and multiply indefinitely, and imports 
will always seek a balance of trade with our products. When we con- 
sider this aspedt of our future destiny we can at once conclude that 
the emancipation of America must bring about, in luxuries, in the 
wealth of nations, in short, in the habits of the human race, a revolu- 
tion far more amazing than that ushered in by its discovery. 

If, then, it is well established that the independence of the United 
States is of greater benefit to England than was their dependence, 
what shall we say of our countries, whose political importance will 
never compare with that of the United States? The results of United 
States independence set such a clear example for all to see that, with- 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


8o 

out doing violence to reason, it is impossible to imagine that England 
would prefer to adopt conservative ideas which have always resulted 
in misery and oppression. 

If we were not loath to make ourselves boring, we should point 
out many other things to banish the fears of some of our friends. 
Let us, therefore, look forward to another more opportune occasion 
when we shall develop and coordinate our ideas in a manner more 
appropriate to what we ourselves have in mind. 


31. Manifesto to the People of Venezuela 
[Printed copy of the period] 

Carupano, September 7, 1814. 

Citizens: 

Unhappy is that magistrate who, being the perpetrator of the 
calamities or crimes of his country, is obliged to defend himself be- 
fore a tribunal of the people against the charges which his fellow- 
citizens make against his conduct; but fortunate indeed is the one 
who, amidst the pitfalls of war, politics, and public misfortunes, pre- 
serves his honor intact, and, innocent, comes forward to exact of 
his companions in misery a just decision respecting his innocence. 

I have been chosen by the fortunes of war to break your chains, 
and I have also been, let us say, the instrument that Providence has 
used to fill your measure of afflictions to the brim. Yes, I have 
brought you peace and freedom, but in the wake of these inestimable 
benefits war and slavery have accompanied me. Victory guided by 
justice has always been our aim even to the very ruin of the fair 
capital of Caracas, which we wrested from the hands of her oppres- 
sors. The laurels of the warriors of New Granada never faded while 
they were fighting the conquerors of Venezuela, and the soldiers of 
Caracas, too, were crowned with similar good fortune against the 
fierce Spaniards, who attempted to subject us anew. If an incon- 
sistent destiny has caused victory to alternate between the enemy 
and ourselves, it has only been because of that inconceivable madness 
on the part of the American peoples which forced them to take up 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


8l 


arms to destroy their liberators and restore the sceptre to their tyrants. 
Thus it appears that Providence, to our humiliation and glory, has 
determined that our brothers shall be our conquerors and that only 
our brothers shall triumph over us. The liberating army has extermi- 
nated the enemy bands, but it could not, nor should it, exterminate 
the people for whose good it has waged hundreds of battles. It is 
not right to destroy men who do not wish to be free, nor is freedom 
that which prevails under the sway of arms and over the opinion of 
fanatics whose depravity of mind induces them to love chains as the 
bonds of society. 

Deplore, then, only those compatriots who, prompted by the fury 
of discord, have submerged you in this sea of calamities, the mere 
sight of which makes Nature tremble, and which is so horrible that 
it is impossible to describe. Your brothers, and not the Spaniards, 
have plunged the knife into your breast, spilled your blood, burned 
your homes, and condemned you to exile. Let your outcries be di- 
rected against those blind slaves who would fetter you with the 
chains that they themselves bear. Harbor no malice toward the 
martyrs, who, as fervent defenders of your liberty, have recklessly 
shed their blood on every field and faced every danger to save you 
from death or ignominy. Be just in your agony even as the cause pro- 
ducing it is just. Do not be so moved by your sufferings, my Citizens, 
as to regard your protectors and friends as accomplices in imaginary 
crimes of either intention or omission. Those who direct your des- 
tinies, no less than their supporters, have had no other purpose than 
to obtain for you a perpetual happiness, which for them should mean 
immortal glory. But, if events have failed to match their aims, and 
if disasters unexampled have frustrated so laudable an enterprise, 
it has not been due to ineptitude or cowardice; rather, it has been 
the inevitable consequence of a gigantic project, greater than all 
human forces. The destruction of a government whose origins are 
lost in the obscurity of time; the overthrow of established principles; 
the changing of ways of life; the remolding of public opinion; and 
the establishment, in fact, of liberty in a country of slaves is a work 
so impossible of rapid execution, so far beyond any human power, 
that our excuse for having failed to achieve what we desire is in- 
herent in the cause which we pursue; for, even as Justice warrants 
the boldness of undertaking it, the impossibility of its accomplish- 
ment only reflects the inadequacy of the means. It is commendable, 
it is noble and sublime, to avenge Nature outraged by tyranny. 
Nothing can compare with the magnitude of such action, and, even 


) 


82 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

if desolation and death should be the reward of this glorious design, 
there would still be no reason to condemn it, because that which 
must be done is not readily accessible; yet, Justice compels us to act. 

In vain have unparalleled efforts won innumerable victories, pur- 
chased at the bitter cost of our heroic soldiers’ blood. Only a few 
successes of our adversaries have brought down the edifice of our 
glory. The majority of the people have been led astray by religious 
fanaticism and reduced by the allurements of a devouring anarchy. 
To the torch of liberty, which we have offered to America as the 
guide and the object of our efforts, our enemies have applied the 
incendiary brand of discord, of devastation, and the strong entice- 
ment of usurped honors and fortunes for men who have been de- 
based by the yoke of servitude and reduced to brutishness by the 
doctrine of superstition. How, with no other support than Truth 
and Nature, could the mere theory of a political philosophy prevail 
against Vice which, armed with an unbridled license and having no 
restraints other than its own capacity, has been transformed over- 
night through the prestige of religion into political virtue and Chris- 
tian charity? No! There are no common men who could appraise 
the eminent worth of the reign of liberty and find it preferable to 
blind ambition and base cupidity. Our fate has depended upon the 
decision of this important question. This choice of liberty over ambi- 
tion lay in the hands of our compatriots who, deluded, decided 
against us. All else that followed flowed from a determination more 
dishonorable than fatal, and more to be regretted in its essence than 
in its results. 

It is malicious stupidity to attribute to public men the vicissitudes 
which the order of events produces in a state. It is not within the 
power of a general or magistrate, in times of turbulence, of shock, 
and of divergent opinions, to check the torrent of human passions 
which, agitated by the forces of revolutions, grow in proportion to 
the force which resists them. And even when grave errors or violent 
passions in the leaders cause frequent injury to the Republic, these 
very injuries must, nevertheless, be weighed fairly and their causes 
sought in the original source of all misfortune— human frailty— and 
the control of Destiny over all events. Man is the feeble pawn of 
Fate which he often endeavors to fathom through reason; yet he 
can never rely upon Fate, since its higher sphere is beyond his 
grasp. To expect politics and war to proceed in keeping with our 
plans, while we labor in doubt aided only by the force of our in- 
tentions and limited support which is at best arbitrary, is like seek- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 83 

ing to achieve, through human resources, results attainable only by a 
divine power. 

Far from entertaining the insane presumption of holding myself 
blameless for my country's catastrophe, I suffer, on the contrary, the 
deepest grief, for I regard myself as the accursed instrument of its 
frightful miseries; but I am innocent because my conscience has 
never been party to any willful error or act of malice, even though, 
on the other hand, it may have advised me wrongly and to no effect. 
My heart encourages me in this conviction of innocence, and this 
testimony in my own behalf is most authentic, however much it may 
appear to be the delirium of pride. Here is the reason why I have 
not replied to any of the accusations which, in good faith or in bad, 
have been made against me. I reserve this act of justice, which my 
own vindication demands, for a tribunal of wise men, who, with 
understanding and righteousness, will judge my conduct during my 
mission to Venezuela. I refer to the Supreme Congress of New 
Granada, to that august body which sent me with its armies to your 
assistance. These armies served heroically, till the last man died on 
the field of honor. 

It is just and necessary that my public life be examined carefully 
and judged impartially. It is just and necessary that I give satisfac- 
tion to any whom I may have offended and that I be cleared of the 
erroneous charges which I have not deserved. This major judgment 
must be pronounced by the sovereign power that I have served. I 
assure you that it will be the most solemn judgment possible and 
that my actions will be supported by irrefutable documents. Then 
you will know whether I have been unworthy of your trust or have 
earned the name of Liberator. I swear to you, beloved Compatriots, 
that this august tide which your gratitude bestowed upon me when 
I came to strike off your chains will not be without purpose. I swear 
to you that as Liberator, living or dead, I will always be worthy of 
the honor you have accorded me; nor is there any human power on 
earth which can stay the course which I have set for myself— to re- 
turn a second time, by that western road already drenched with so 
much blood and adorned with so many laurels, to make you free. 
Have hope, Compatriots! The noble, the good Granadan people will 
return, eager to earn new trophies, to give you new support, and once 
more to bring you freedom, unless you previously achieve it by your 
own valor. 

Yes, Compatriots, your virtues alone are capable of combating 
successfully this multitude of madmen who do not understand their 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


84 

own interest and honor. Freedom has never been subjugated by 
tyranny. Do not compare your physical forces with those of the 
enemy, because spirit and matter cannot be compared. You are men; 
they are beasts. You are free; they are slaves. Fight, and you will 
win. God grants victory to the persevering. 1 

Bolivar 


32. To [Manuel de Bernardo Alvarez], President 
of Cundinamarca 2 

[ Letterbook ] 

Campo de Techo, December 8, 1814. 
His Excellency, The President of Cundinamarca: 

I have been ordered by the general government of New Granada 
to your capital, to employ the most efficient measures to bring about 
the union of Cundinamarca with the other free and independent 
states of that republic. It is my duty, and so my heart dictates, 
thereby making it an irresistible necessity for me, to employ the 
methods of fraternal and friendly negotiation before firing a shot, 
which might initiate a fratricidal campaign that would be thor- 
oughly detestable and deserving of the execration of men. Citizens 
of the same republic, professing the same sublime religion of Jesus, 
comrades in arms, in birth, and in purpose, could commit no greater 
evil than to battle those whom, for numerous reasons, they should 
love and serve. 

I, Citizen-President, consider myself degraded to the level of our 
tyrants, when I contemplate the victorious armies, composed of so 
many monsters, marching to stain the brilliance of their undefeated 
arms with the blood of a sister city to whom we owe in part the 

The next day Bolivar left Venezuela for the second time, again sailing for 
Cartagena, where he arrived late in September, 1814 (ed.). 

2 Alvarez, as President-Dictator of Cundinamarca, one of the states which 
formed the Confederation of the United Provinces of New Granada, had re- 
fused to cooperate with that confederation despite the desire of many citizens 
of Bogota to rejoin the United Provinces (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 85 

liberty of Venezuela, Popaydn, and New Granada: a city which is 
the pride of this fair territory, the fount of enlightenment, and the 
cradle of many illustrious men. Santa Fe [de Bogotd] will be re- 
spected by me and by my armies so long as I retain a single ray of 
hope that she will see the light and submit to the laws of the 
Republic, which have been established by the representatives of the 
people in the Congress of New Granada. Justice demands this 
measure; force will make it effective; but prudence recommends that 
the ravages of force be avoided. 

Providence has destined me to become the liberator of the op- 
pressed peoples, and thus it is that I will never be the conqueror of 
a single village. The heroes of Venezuela, who have triumphed in 
hundreds of battles, always in behalf of freedom, have not crossed 
the wastelands, the paramos , 1 and the mountain ranges only to im- 
pose chains upon their compatriots, the sons of America. Our object 
is to unite all under one leadership, so that our resources may be 
directed toward the final end of restoring to the New World its 
rights of freedom and independence. 

Consequently, I again assert what the government has promised: 
I offer absolute immunity of life, property, and honor to all the in- 
habitants of your capital, both Americans and Europeans, if, by 
agreement with me, or by amicably joining the general government, 
the spilling of blood and the use of force can be avoided. Let those 
tremble who would wage war against their brothers, who come to 
liberate them. Let those tremble who would battle the army of 
Venezuela united with that of New Granada; let the tyrants tremble, 
since they alone would take up arms against these saviors of their 
country. But no one need tremble before the armies of the union, 
when these are received with the honor that is their due. 

May God keep you for many years. 


1 See note, p. 203. 


86 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


33. To Juan Jurado, Citizen of Santa Fe de Bogota 
[Copy] 

Campo de Techo, December 8, 1814. 

My friend: 

As you are the only one whom I can call by this name in your 
city, I am taking the liberty of sending you this letter so that you will 
not permit yourself to be deceived by the lies and inventions con- 
cerning my conduct and that of my troops. Be patient but a while 
and I will tell you my story in a few words. I was named comman- 
dant of Puerto Cabello where there were many criminals whom, 
although they had conspired against the tort and the town, I did not 
have shot, as I should have done to save my country and to prevent 
its subsequent loss. I came to liberate the Magdalena [region] and 
took more than 260 prisoners, mostly Spaniards from the Albuera 
regiment. I did not execute these, except in the case of a creole, 
Dominguez by name, traitor to his country. I entered Venezuela, 
and, as the campaign began, I condemned to death only a certain 
Conde, because he had come to my camp as a spy, and Rizo, because 
he had been our bitterest enemy in Ocana. Otherwise, everyone was 
pardoned. Ask Garcia Herreros, who is iA your hands, if this is not 
true. Tizcar captured sixteen of our best officers and men and had 
them shot at Barinas. At the same time, Zuazola, in Cumana, de- 
stroyed entire towns because they were [inhabited by] patriots. 
Antonanzas slaughtered 300 of our prisoners in San Juan de los 
Morros during the previous campaign. Boves, on the llanos , outdid 
himself in cruelty while I was in Merida. Would it be right to suffer 
a war unto death, and not wage one? I have declared one and I 
have put it into action; but not with the severity that I should have 
employed. I arrived at La Victoria and there granted a capitulation, 
which the Spaniards did not deserve. The man who should have 
ratified it fled; I then sent it to Monteverde for ratification, and he 
replied that the people of La Victoria should not and could not come 
to terms with me. Meanwhile, he placed all of the patriots of 
Puerto Cabello in dungeons and convict ships. In reprisal, I did the 
same with the Spaniards. I offered to exchange 400 of them for 200 
patriots, declaring that I would have them shot if our men were 
sacrificed. My offer was not accepted, and our prisoners were exe- 
cuted; meanwhile, Boves neared the capital, slaughtering the popu- 
lation en route, sparing neither women nor children. What should I 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


87 

have done without any garrison in La Guaira, and with some 1,000 
Spaniards in the dungeons and fortresses? Should I have let the 
same disastrous fate ensue that overtook the fortress of Puerto Ca- 
bello, which destroyed my country and left me shorn of honor? 
My friend, put yourself or any Spaniard in my place, and anyone 
who would not have done the same would not, I say, be man or 
Spaniard. There you have my much-heralded cruelties, my irreli- 
gion, and all the rest which these men, who scarcely know me or 
not at all, have graciously attributed to me. 

Respecting your own present situation, I state and declare on my 
word of honor that the government has neither declared war to 
the death, nor have I waged it; nor will I ever do so in this peaceful 
land where the Spaniards have conducted themselves so differently 
from those in Venezuela. The incident of Jover 1 and his com- 
panions has been sternly reproved by the government, and more 
so by me. I am sending you that document, in witness of this fact. 

You may well imagine that, as my object in coming here is to 
seek aid from this country, I would not be so stupid as to desire 
conflict with its government, nor do I wish to offend public opinion, 
which abhors the war to the death. Moreover, knowing me, you 
realize that I am most generous with my friends and with those who 
do me no injury. You know also that I am ruthless with those who 
harm me. My purpose is to avoid bloodshed, for which reason I 
would have you enter into negotiations which will spare the in- 
habitants of your city the horrors of a siege and of an attack which 
I will shortly be forced to make. Not a single godo 2 3 or regentist will 
then be left alive, but millions of innocent victims will perish. Our 
troops are invincible. They have never attacked without gaining 
victory. They are the ones who have triumphed in a thousand com- 
bats, and, had they been in Caracas, Caracas would be free. Your 
situation is desperate. No assistance can reach you. Santa Marta is 
already being attacked by our Venezuelan generals and officers who 
are leading Cartagenan troops which had remained inactive for lack 
of leaders. Popaydn is not yet occupied by the enemy. The furthest 
advanced troops are in Patia, under the orders of Vicente Parra; 
and Aymerich is in Pasto, quite unmolested. This I know from docu- 
ments that I have just received from President Vallencilla, which 
came yesterday for the Congress. Boves has no army because Morales, 

1 Juan Jover and four others were put to death by a Venezuelan officer of the 

Urdaneta division (comp.). 

3 Literally Goth— the regional name for Spaniard (ed.). 


88 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


his second-in-command, was routed at Maturin, the same Morales 
who pitted all his forces against me at Barcelona and who, though 
he carried the day at Aragua, was completely defeated at Maturin, 
bulwark of Venezuelan liberty. You have no munitions. I have many 
and I can expect more as needed from Cartagena, which has placed 
everything necessary for this war at the disposal of the Congress. I 
can increase my forces as needed; yours can only diminish and with 
them the provisions and the ardor which has deceived those un- 
fortunates who under no circumstances are a match for our troops, 
which equal or excel Napoleon's finest. There is still time, my friend, 
to save them. I hold religiously to my promises and stake the glory 
of my name on living up to them, for my ambition is only to free 
my country and to be regarded as a man of honor by my contempo- 
raries. But if, on the contrary, my troops and officers should suffer 
any losses because of the blind and insane obduracy of your city's 
inhabitants, soldiers, and government, I greatly fear that Santa Fe 
will suffer frightful catastrophe, comparable to the most horrible 
episodes of our present war, in which hundreds of towns have been 
reduced to ruin and to ashes— in short, to horrible desolation. Do not 
doubt but that the life or death of those who live there hangs upon 
the decision which you must make. Accept all that we offer, or all 
that you refuse us will be lost. 

We seek only the fraternal union of your government with the 
general government, for which purpose a civilian commission com- 
posed of the citizens Camilo Torres and J. M. Castillo y Baraya [sic] 
is on its way. Immediately upon my entry into Santa Fe, I will 
leave for Venezuela. I will not intervene in any matter that con- 
cerns this country, excepting that which affects the military aid 
which I will require in order to take the western part of that repub- 
lic, the capital of which is probably already occupied by the troops 
from the east. In short, my friend, you, who know me, must dis- 
illusion the deceived. Please believe that I have in no way changed. 
As a lover of freedom, I possess noble and liberal sentiments, and if 
l practice severity, it is only on those who attempt to destroy us. 
Farewell, etc. 


Sim6n Bolivar 


1815 


34. To [Juan de Dios Amador], Governor of Cartagena 
[Letterbook] 

Bogota, January 17, 1815. 

To the Governor of Cartagena: 

The general government has seen fit to entrust me with the com- 
mand of the army that is to march against Santa Marta; and I am 
leaving here with two thousand men to join forces with the troops 
on the Magdalena and in Ocana. 

Half of these troops must be armed there, for it is necessary to 
retain a thousand or more rifles here and at other points in the 
interior. In addition, all possible vessels and seamen should be 
assembled there immediately. As it is believed that the required 
number of men cannot be assembled at the Magdalena, it will be 
necessary to have others brought in advance from the Sinu and 
Bocachica. This campaign will probably be very brief, and this fact 
will greatly diminish the seamen’s dislike for the service. 

I trust and request that Your Excellency will issue prompt and 
precise orders to effect these requests, as well as for the collecting 
of provisions of all kinds, for Santa Marta is said to be extremely 
short of supplies. 

There is another very important factor to which I must ask Your 
Excellency to give particular attention; that is, funds for the army. 
Notwithstanding the capitulation I granted to this city, which in 
effect was exceedingly favorable to the Spaniards here, it was possible 
to collect 200,000 pesos which have been used to clothe and pay the 
troops. This sum will suffice until we reach your province. Provision 
should be made for the future as well as for the present expenses of 
the expedition, and I see no reason or obstacle to prevent us from 
obtaining an equal or a larger amount in Santa Marta. Although 
your province has met with very heavy expenses in the war which it 
is waging, the extraordinary recourse of a forced loan or donation has 
never been attempted. Nothing in particular has been demanded of 
the Spaniards. They are not to be considered as fellow-citizens— our 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


90 

irreconcilable enemies cannot be so regarded. And since we have 
thus far allowed them to live among us, they should begin to pay 
for the privilege. Have the goodness, Your Excellency, to demand 
that sum of them, voluntarily or by force. Have them take from their 
shops the cloth and other materials sufficient to make two thousand 
uniforms immediately; compel them to pay for the tailoring. All 
this will be but a trifling indemnity for the harm they have done us. 
In Cundinamarca they have begun to experience the treatment they 
deserve; in fact, the energy of the new government has been felt even 
by the patriots. Former President Lozano had his property seized and 
auctioned off to cover the amount assigned to him as a forced loan. 
Everyone realizes how imminent and great is the danger, and how 
urgent the need to dispel it. All will expect no less a display of 
energy and determination from Your Excellency and those patriots 
who have so distinguished themselves in the Confederation. 

I am firmly convinced that Your Excellency will leave no stone 
unturned to accomplish whatever may be necessary to reduce the 
flow of blood and the casualties in the Santa Marta campaign, by 
building and reinforcing, in every way, the Army of Liberation; it 
only remains for me to ask that you kindly issue orders to the effect 
that mine be quickly and properly obeyed. On this, you may be sure, 
our success largely depends. 

Most of my troops are already at Honda. I will leave here on the 
20th, and I am hopeful that I will be able to overcome any obstacles 
that may oppose our advance. Upon reaching the province of Santa 
Marta early in February, I should like to continue my military opera- 
tions without interruption. Nothing will facilitate this more than the 
prompt execution of the suggestions that I have made, and Your 
Excellency's attention to the assembling and equipping for action of 
as many warships, privateers, and suitable forces as can be made 
available for this undertaking. 

God keep Your Excellency many years. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


91 


35. To the Electoral College of the 
Province of Cundinamarca 

[Letter book] 

Bogotd, January 20, 1815. 

Most Honorable President: 

When Cundinamarca, contrary to its own sentiments and interests, 
was separated from the general government of New Granada, it 
became my most painful duty to risk and, if necessary, to sacrifice 
my life to effect a reconciliation between brothers who, although sin- 
cere in their efforts, were disunited because of a fascination as involun- 
tary as it was senseless. For a service which my innermost convictions 
prompted me to render my countrymen, and the memory alone of 
which has been my greatest reward, you have given me the title of Il- 
lustrious and Hallowed Pacificator of Cundinamarca. The laurels 
that crown the victors, Sir, are infinitely less glorious than are the 
sacred obligations which you have bestowed upon me. I am, there- 
fore, humbled by the lofty honors which your generosity, superior to 
all my virtues, nobly confers upon me. 

Please accept my most respectful expression of infinite gratitude, 
sincere regard, and high esteem. 

God keep you, Sir, for many years. 


36. To Pedro Gual, Governor of Cartagena 
[Letterbook] 

Mompox, February 9, 1815. 

My dear Gual: 

I have received your two letters which have been delivered to me 
by my friend Tomds Montilla, and our former vicar, Father Castro. 
In them I note with the greatest of pleasure that the blind passion of 
civil war has not caused you to lose the friendship which you have 
always held for me and that you would like to be the instrument of a 
peaceful reconciliation. The bearers of these letters have also told 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


9 2 

me of your behavior during the upheavals that have shaken Carta- 
gena all this past month, which, it appears, has been that of conform- 
ing to the circumstances that have alternately favored either party. 
In such cases, it is my opinion that either error or the force of pas- 
sions keeps men from taking the right path; but during a period of 
agitation no one takes the position he should, and certainly not that 
which his real character would indicate. To judge revolutions and 
their participants, one must observe them at close range and judge 
them from afar. Extremes cannot be reconciled, because of the short 
space of time which has elapsed and the personalities involved in 
the particular instance. Judgment cannot be impartial, and conse- 
quendy the verdict reached must be incorrect. Such is my way of 
thinking, my dear friend, and therefore your slanderers cannot harm 
you, nor can your friends vindicate you until the present crisis is 
past; then will Gual be the same Gual that he has always been. 

You ask me: “Can I not be the mediator in a reconciliation that 
I heartily wish to see established?” Let me reply with another ques- 
tion: Can I subordinate the interests of my country to base and vio- 
lent passions? Can I listen to talk of vengeance, and lend a deaf ear 
to the voice of reason? Can I despise a friend who offers me the 
friendship of an enemy? No, no, no, dear Gual. 

I pursue the glorious career of arms only to garner the honors it 
affords, to free my country, and to merit the blessings of its peoples. 
Why, then, would I care to tarnish the laurels with which fortune 
favors me on the field of battle and allow myself to be carried away, 
like a woman, by emotions truly feminine? Not only with the Briga- 
dier Castillo who supports our cause but with Ferdinand VII who 
opposes it, am I ready to become reconciled for the sake of the Re- 
public s freedom. I say to you, on my honor, that if Brigadier Castillo 
desires my friendship, you may offer it to him, and in immediate 
token of my sincerity I will agree to either an official or a private 
communication that must be made public, in which we solemnly 
state that the falseness of sinister reports, heated passions, and diver- 
gent viewpoints have been the source of the scandalous insults that 
we have both received. In short, let him do everything in his power 
to satisfy me, and I on my part will do the same for him. I need not 
emphasize for you the candor of my character and the sincerity of 
these sentiments, for if I did not open my heart I could not express 
them; I am much too proud to lower myself by deceit. 

I confess frankly that I have been affected, as I could not help 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


93 

being, by the misfortune of the Pin6rez family, 1 as much for their 
political virtues as for the gratitude I owe them for their generous 
favors to me. As Sim6n Bolivar I solemnly affirm that, wherever my 
refuge, it shall likewise be that of the Pin6rez; as magistrate or gen- 
eral I commit myself to nothing since it is for the government to 
decide the fate of its citizens; but I do promise that I shall never take 
sides to avenge these unfortunate friends. 

I make one request of you, either as magistrate or as a private citi- 
zen: have D’Elhuyar and the others, whoever they may be, who are 
imprisoned with him on his account, released. In civil wars it is po- 
litic to be generous, since vengeance grows progressively. This is a 
maxim for you, Gual; bear it in mind. 

Since Montilla is staying because he wants to be in my company, 
my aide-de-camp Kent will deliver this letter to you, the reply to 
which I will await through him. 

Farewell, etc. 


37. To [Custodio GarcIa Rovira], President of the 
United Provinces of New Granada 

[O’Leary, XIV, 236] 

General Headquarters, La Popa, May 8, 1815. 

Your Excellency: 

Love of public tranquility and of country have forced me to re- 
sign command of the army, whose direction the general government 
had entrusted to me. Cartagena preferred civil war, anarchy, and 
self-destruction to the duty of complying with the orders of the gov- 
ernment it had sworn to obey. 

When I saw that the province was being lost through civil war and 
occupation by the common enemy and that support was withheld from 
the army that could save it only because I was in command, I re- 
solved to make the last sacrifice within my power: I decided to sepa- 


1 A prominent Cartagena family, which controlled the city briefly in 1815, 
only to be ousted and mistreated by Castillo (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


94 

rate myself from my friends and companions-at-arms, from those 
to whom I owed my fortunes in battle; to leave the country as a 
means of furthering its salvation and that of the army; and, what 
is more, I decided to forego an opportunity to meet the enemies of 
the Republic in battle. Your Excellency may judge by the nature 
of my decision how convinced I am of its necessity in these circum- 
stances. 

On my separation from the army, the command fell to General 
Palacios, to whom, by express order of Marimon, I have just sur- 
rendered it. This General, like the army as a whole, has clearly mani- 
fested his friendship for a leader in whose company he has often 
fought, and who has never sought any reward in these wars other 
than the glory of serving his country. Every soldier, I blush to say, 
every soldier preferred above all to share my fate; but my only object, 
my only intention was to preserve the army intact for the Union. 

As the Governor of Cartagena has intercepted all my correspond- 
ence with the general government sent in the last three posts, Your 
Excellency is probably not fully informed of all that has occurred or 
of all my efforts for peace. But I will repeat them in quieter times, 
and I trust that my countrymen and the whole world will then justly 
evaluate my conduct and decide whether anyone in my position has 
ever made greater sacrifices for his country. My last request to the 
Governor was for the friendship of this province so that I might seek 
inevitable death in Santa Marta, but this request was as fruitless as 
that of asking for arms with which to fight and conquer. Yes, had my 
companions received arms, we would have won. 

Whatever my ultimate fate, my last breath will always be for my 
country. I shall always remember the gratitude I owe the government 
of the Union, and I shall never forget that the men of New Granada 
started me on the path to glory. I assure Your Excellency that my 
every day, to the very last that Providence grants me, will be em- 
ployed in the service of America. 

The renunciation of my command, of my fortune, and of my future 
glory required no effort on my part. It is so natural for me to prefer 
the welfare of the Republic to all else that, the more I suffer in its 
behalf, the greater the inner satisfaction my soul receives. I will 
never again be a general. I will depart and live far from friends and 
countrymen. I shall not die for my country. But I shall have rendered 
it a new service in bringing peace by my absence. Were I to remain 
here, New Granada would divide into parties, and the civil war 
would be eternal. On my withdrawal, there will be no party but that 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


95 

of our country; and it is by remaining always united that its best 
interests will be served. 

Most excellent Sir, in recompense for my services I ask only that 
my errors be forgotten. May God correct them! I protest to Your 
Excellency the sincerity of my intentions, the love I feel for my 
fellow-citizens, and the respect and obedience I owe to the govern- 
ment. 

Please accept the expression of my unbounded gratitude. May God 
keep Your Excellency for many years. 

Sim6n Bolivar 

[In the margin ] Sante Fe, September 10, 1815. Noted, as was done with a 
previous communication of May 27, from Kingston, with the added remark 
that this letter has been delivered by his aide-de-camp Bdez-Rodriguez. 


38. To Maxwell Hyslop, Merchant of Jamaica 

[Copy] 

Kingston, May 19, 1815. 

My dear Sir: 

I have the honor of sending you a brief account of the latest events 
in New Granada and the present state of the Costa Firme. I do not 
flatter myself that my report, which you requested for use in your 
private negotiations, will be as accurate as the importance of the 
events warrants. 

After Venezuela had again been subjugated by our enemies, the 
Spaniards, I proceeded to New Granada where I placed myself at 
the head of a division of Venezuelan troops that, ordered by the Con- 
gress, marched on the capital [of Cundinamarca], Santa Fe, to force 
it to return to the constitutional fold, from which Cundinamarca had 
seceded. In that province my small division was greatly increased in 
men, uniforms, and money. With this army, I was directed to obtain 
sufficient arms and munitions in Cartagena to liberate Santa Marta 
and Venezuela. By one of those misfortunes common in revolutions, 
there were two parties in Cartagena, one moderate and calm, the other 
hody opposed to the Spanish royalists. The first won over the second, 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


96 

because the general of the troops had laid siege to the city and had 
destroyed those who called themselves the true patriots. Meanwhile, 
I had been made Captain General of the armies of New Granada 
and had moved to Cartagena to take command of the military forces. 
General Castillo, who then headed these forces, although not una- 
ware of the governments authority and mine, refused to do his duty 
as a subordinate, and did not allow me to take possession of the city, 
the arms, or the army of Cartagena. The reason for this disobedience 
was his well-founded fear that he would be tried in due form for his 
malfeasance in annihilating the liberal party of Cartagena. In this 
situation I exhausted every means of conciliation in an effort to 
avoid civil war, as will be seen from the authentic documents which 
I will publish in support of my actions. Unfortunately, civil war 
broke out, and the troops under my command approached Cartagena 
for the actual purpose of securing the submission of these rebels who 
stubbornly continued to hold out, adhering to their criminal and in- 
expedient refusals. 

Foreseeing that the enemy would employ its forces in occupying 
the province of Cartagena while our civil strife provided them with 
the opportunity of so doing with impunity; foreseeing this, I there- 
fore, I repeat, proposed to the citizens of Cartagena that we abandon 
the seige and march against the enemy, though we lacked the most 
indispensable military supplies. Their final reply, after more than 
forty days, was, in substance, that not only would they never aid us 
but they would forever oppose us. I then knew that our situation 
was becoming more and more endangered by the tangle of circum- 
stances in which we were enmeshed; consequently, I decided to re- 
sign the command so that the city of Cartagena, instead of cooper- 
ating with the enemy against us, would use my troops in its own 
defense; because the city would inevitably have fallen into the hands 
of the Spaniards had I persisted in the attempt to force it to obey 
my orders. This disaster would have entailed many others, and so I 
preferred to leave a country where I had always served the public 
welfare and where my presence, at the time, would have been the 
signal for fresh outbreaks. 

On the other hand, the situation in New Granada and Venezuela 
gave me no reason to anticipate victory. It made me fear many de- 
velopments that might have dishonored our arms and sacrificed our 
country, events which later would have been ascribed to me, although 
my only share therein would be to have been the first victim of them. 

Venezuela's occupation by Spanish arms makes it necessary for 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


97 

New Granada to defend a line of over four hundred leagues in that 
area, and the number of her troops should therefore be in proportion. 
But such is not the case: New Granada has only six thousand men 
who, scattered along its borders, do not count for much. In the prov- 
ince of Pamplona one thousand men garrison Cucuta; in Popay&n, 
one thousand six hundred; in Cartagena, two thousand five hundred, 
and in the capital of Santa Fe, five hundred. With these troops, the 
defense of so vast a territory cannot even be imagined. 

The Spaniards of Venezuela had intended to send five or six 
thousand men against the border provinces of Casanare and Pam- 
plona, for the purpose of penetrating as far as Santa Fe from the 
south and establishing communication with Santa Marta from the 
north. These operations have been delayed, no doubt in the hope of 
definitely and permanently executing them in conjunction with the 
army that has reached the Costa Firme from Spain, under the orders 
of General Morillo. Our enemies already hold the capital of the 
Granadan province of Casanare. They control the Magdalena River, 
having taken over both its banks and the gunboats that kept open 
communications and commerce with New Granada. Now that the 
Spanish troops of Venezuela and those of Santa Marta have been 
reinforced by four or five thousand of General Morillo’s men, it must 
be conceded that they are reestablishing the Spanish government 
from the mouth of the Orinoco to the Kingdom of Quito, which they 
also possess. Their forces are sufficient to establish communication 
with the Spanish troops in Peru and to act jointly against those in 
Buenos Aires, who have probably suspended their active operations 
in anticipation of the arrival of General Morillos expedition, which 
was reportedly destined for the La Plata River area. 

In my opinion, if General Morillo acts wisely and quickly, restora- 
tion of the Spanish government in South America appears inevitable. 
This Spanish expeditionary force could increase in size rather than 
diminish while on the march. Already in Venezuela, it is said that 
they have added three thousand men of that country. Even if this is 
false, it could be done, since the people, accustomed to their former 
rule, are not unwilling to obey these inhuman tyrants. 

It is true that the climate will take a toll of the European troops, 
but the country will supply them with even more replacements. We 
must not disillusion ourselves. Public opinion in America is still not 
firmly fixed, and, while every thinking person is, without exception, 
for independence, the mass of the population is still ignorant of its 
rights and unmindful of its interests. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


98 

Now is the time, Sir, and perhaps the last, when England can and 
should take a hand in the destiny of this immense hemisphere, which 
will succumb or be effaced unless a powerful nation comes to its aid 
and maintains it against the indifference in which it is enveloped by 
its own population, by European vicissitudes, and by the eternal 
laws of Nature. Perhaps a little aid in the present crisis would suffice 
to spare South America the bitterness of devastation and enormous 
losses! Perhaps, when England does cast her glance in the direction 
of America, there will be no America to see! 

British trade has lost in Venezuela seven million pesos annually 
—Venezuela's total output in her period of greatest disaster. Now it 
further appears that England will also lose the trade of New Gra- 
nada, which has been hers exclusively, with gold exports running 
into high figures, although I have not been able to learn the exact 
amounts because of the turbulent conditions. But the incalculable 
loss that Great Britain will suffer holds for the entire continent of 
South America, where, protected by her arms and commerce, there 
could be extracted in the short period of only ten years more precious 
metals than those which now circulate in the entire world. The 
mountains of New Granada are of gold and silver. A small number 
of mineralogists could discover more mines than those of all Peru and 
New Spain. What immense expectations this small part of the New 
World holds for British industry! I shall not speak of the other re- 
gions which only await the dawn of liberty to take to their bosom 
the continental Europeans and in a few years make another Europe 
of America, which, with England, by increasing her weight in the 
political scales, will quickly reduce that of her enemies, who indi- 
recdy and inevitably will come here, striving to counter England's 
commercial supremacy, and will bring enlarged military forces suf- 
ficient to check the colossus that extends to every corner of the earth. 

These extensive benefits can be obtained with the most insignifi- 
cant means: twenty or thirty thousand rifles, a million pounds ster- 
ling, fifteen or twenty men-of-war, munitions, several envoys, and any 
volunteers who may wish to fight under the flags of America. This is 
all that is needed to bring liberty to half the earth and set the world 
in balance. 

Costa Firme could be saved with six or eight thousand rifles, the 
necessary ammunition, and five hundred thousand duros 1 to defray 
the costs of the early months of the campaign. With this aid, the rest 

*Duro. A coin containing ten silver reales, equal to eight British shillings 

(ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


99 


of South America could be protected from danger; and, at the same 
time, the provinces of Panam4 and Nicaragua could be turned over 
to the British government for the latter to make of them the center of 
commerce by building canals which, after the dikes guarding both 
oceans have been broken, will reduce all distances, however long, and 
permanently establish British commercial supremacy. 

I have outlined what now appears to me to be of benefit to the 
commerce of the nation to which you have the honor of belonging, 
and, although I should have desired to dwell upon things of greatest 
import to our respective countries, I have not deemed it opportune to 
do so until circumstances better the American cause. 

Please let me assure you of my high esteem and respect Your 
most humble servant, 

Sim6n Bolivar 


39. To Luis Brion, Merchant of Curacao 

7 i 

[Copy] 

Kingston, July 16, 1815. 

My dear and esteemed friend: 

I know not what I should most admire in you: your generosity, 
your patriotism, or your kindness. Yours must be a character quite 
extraordinary for you to sacrifice yourself without stint in the interests 
of a cause which is being torn asunder by its own offspring. To you, 
friend Bri6n, must be accorded the honor of being the foremost 
patron of America and the most liberal of men. 

I have read your letter with pleasure and much feeling. In it 
you inform me of the most recent services you have rendered Amer- 
ica, services which might alone suffice to give her freedom but which 
may, perhaps, prove fruitless if we do not know how to conduct 
ourselves in the present crisis. I, dear friend, propose to speak to you 
with the frankness that you ask of me and which I owe to a patron 
of my country. 

You wish to know the state of affairs on the Costa Firme. I shall say 
only what I know, what I think, and what I foresee. 


IOO 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


New Granada has five or six thousand men spread along the bor- 
ders of Popaydn, Pamplona, and Cartagena. Those of the interior are 
badly armed and even worse off for ammunition, but they have good 
officers and leaders, and their courage is great. Cartagena possesses 
all that the interior lacks but is short on military virtues. The rem- 
nants of Venezuela have been destroyed by the intrigue and bad faith 
of her domestic enemies, so that we can count but litde upon the fine 
troops we formerly had to defend New Granada and to liberate Vene- 
zuela. The enemy in New Granada is very weak; unless Morillo ap- 
proaches with his army, you must not believe that the country will 
succumb. But if Morillo besieges Cartagena with two or three thou- 
sand men, and if Castillo defends it, I believe it will quickly sur- 
render . 1 If three or four thousand men attack the interior, they will 
conquer it; but they will not hold it peacefully, for there will be a 
great deal of guerrilla warfare against the Spaniards. This latter evil 
could be avoided if eight or ten thousand rifles, together with powder, 
which the interior also lacks, were to be brought in by way of the 
Atrato River toward Santa Fe, Tunja, and Socorro. 

New Granada is a well-populated country; its men are very coura- 
geous, and it can raise a large army. It also has a wealth of money to 
buy from you everything you bring, and there is a great willingness 
to do so, since all the elements needed to carry on the war are lack- 
ing. 

I shall not advise you to do this or that, insofar as your private in- 
terests are concerned, because I understand little of these affairs of 
speculation and because, moreover, the results might prove disappoint- 
ing. But if, without greatly compromising yourself, you can make new 
sacrifices, the route I conceive to be the best is that of the Atrato, as 
Cartagena now has no communication with the interior, is without 
money, and has more than enough arms and ammunition. I believe 
that by the time you receive this letter you will have made your final 
decision. Nevertheless, I am stating what you want to know; and, as 
I am anxious that New Granada receive aid and that this aid not be 
lost, I have thought it advisable to send you a person whom I can 
trust, and one who will help you in everything that may be useful to 
your interests and to the common cause. My ablest lieutenant, Colo- 
nel Miguel Carabano, is the man assigned to deliver this letter to you, 
and under separate cover he will carry full credentials relative to his 
commission. He has the capacity not only to plan but to execute a 

1 Cartagena fell in December, 1815, after a siege of three months. Castillo was 
captured and hanged (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


IOI 


great enterprise. He has military training and talent. His courage is 
beyond all exaggeration. In a word, he is capable of liberating New 
Granada. I entreat you to hear him, attend him, and, if necessary, 
supply him with money for whatever he may need on his voyage. I 
will repay you for this last sacrifice when I can, and should I not do 
so, your generosity is such that you will not greatly resent it. 

As for me, I am disposed to do anything for my country. For this 
reason I am endeavoring to obtain assistance from this government, 
which will be granted me if not today, then tomorrow or another day. 
Meanwhile, I am living in uncertainty and in misery. I myself am not 
going to your island [Curasao] because I do not want to lose the con- 
fidence that these gentlemen here have reposed in me, for you know 
how terrible are the whims of the aristocrats. Carabano will give you 
full information. 

Good-bye, my dear friend. I regard you as the best friend America 
has, and I am your most humble and obedient servant, 

Sim6n Bolivar 


40. To [Jos£ Miguel Pey], President of the United 
Provinces of New Granada 

[Copy] 

Kingston, Jamaica, August 22, 1815. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

Today there arrived from England public documents reporting the 
occupation of Paris on July 8, by the armies allied against France, the 
restoration of Louis XVIII to his throne, and the escape of Napoleon 
Bonaparte. 

The fate of the world has been decided at Waterloo. Europe has 
been freed by this immortal battle, the consequences of which may 
be greater than any ever known in the history of the world, especially 
with respect to America, for she will see that vast theatre of war, 
that has for more than twenty years ravaged Europe, transferred to 
her shores. If it is true that Bonaparte has escaped from France and 
seeks, as it is reported, asylum in America, then, whatever the country 


102 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


of his choice, that country will be destroyed by his presence. With 
him will come the English hatred of his tyranny and Europe’s jeal- 
ousy of America. The armies of all nations will follow in his tracks, 
and all America, if necessary, will be blockaded by the British fleet. 

If Napoleon is welcomed by North America, she will be attacked 
by all Europe; consequently, Bonaparte will attempt to gain the sup- 
port of the Independents of Mexico, the neighbors of the United 
States. If South America is struck by the thunderbolt of Bonaparte’s 
arrival, misfortune will ever be ours if our country accords him a 
friendly reception. His thirst for conquest is insatiable; he has 
mowed down the flower of European youth on the batdefield in order 
to carry out his ambitious projects. The same designs will bring him 
to the New World, hoping, no doubt, to take advantage of the dis- 
sensions that divide America in order to enthrone himself in this 
great empire, cost though it may the blood still remaining in our 
veins, as if America were not already sufficiently distressed, suffi- 
ciendy ruined by the war of extermination that Spain wages against 
her. 

Your Excellency, if the last blow that our unhappy country can 
withstand should be delivered, that is, if Bonaparte lands on our 
shores, whatever his strength, whatever policy he intends to pursue, 
there should be no doubt about our decision. We should fight him, 
for he is the harbinger of greater calamities than those we have 
already suffered. I believe it to be my duty to point out to Your Ex- 
cellency that because, in the present state of affairs, it is desirable to 
prevent any disastrous occurrence which might result from a misun- 
derstanding on the part of our enemies or neutrals, and for many 
other reasons that cannot escape Your Excellency’s keen insight, it 
appears absolutely necessary that your government take every precau- 
tionary measure to prevent Bonaparte or his agents from entering, 
either openly or secredy, our provinces and ports. It is equally urgent 
that we issue a positive and definitive statement that will preclude 
any suspicion on the part of the enemies of France, who might think 
America foolish enough to ally herself with a fugitive and to shelter 
him so that he may reestablish his tyranny in countries that are fight- 
ing for liberty and have sacrificed everything to attain it. 

The final outcome of our cause depends upon the sagacity with 
which our governments act in this extraordinary crisis. I cannot bring 
myself to believe that there are Independents so inimical to the in- 
terests of their country that they will side with Bonaparte; but should 
anyone be so rash, he will not have the support of the people; and if 



The Boarding of the Intrepido 






















* 


















il 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


103 


he does, Spain will be aided as Louis XVIII has been. On the other 
hand, it is virtually certain that England will use her power in our 
behalf if we declare against her implacable enemy, who, if he asks 
asylum, will do so not in order to lead a peaceful life but rather to 
spend the rest of his days fighting his conquerors. 

May Your Excellency receive with indulgence these obvious re- 
marks. I have the honor to be, Sir, with the greatest esteem, your 
humble servant. God keep Your Excellency many years. 

Sim6n Bolivar 


41. Reply of a South American to a Gentleman 
of this Island [Jamaica] 1 

[Blanco y Aspurua, V, 331-342] 

Kingston, Jamaica, September 6, 1815. 

My dear Sir: 

I hasten to reply to the letter of the 29th ultimo which you had 
the honor of sending me and which I received with the greatest satis- 
faction. 

Sensible though I am of the interest you desire to take in the 
fate of my country, and of your commiseration with her for the tor- 
tures she has suffered from the time of her discovery until the present 
at the hands of her destroyers, the Spaniards, I am no less sensible of 
the obligation which your solicitous inquiries about the principal 
objects of American policy place upon me. Thus, I find myself in 
conflict between the desire to reciprocate your confidence, which 
honors me, and the difficulty of rewarding it, for lack of documents 
and books and because of my own limited knowledge of a land so 
vast, so varied, and so little known as the New World. 

In my opinion it is impossible to answer the questions that you 
have so kindly posed. Baron von Humboldt himself, with his encyclo- 

1 Frequendy entided 'The Jamaica Letter,” this exposition is the most widely 
known and most significant of his early writings on political and international 
affairs (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


IO4 

pedic theoretical and practical knowledge, could hardly do so prop- 
erly, because, although some of the facts about America and her 
development are known, I dare say the better part are shrouded in 
mystery. Accordingly, only conjectures that are more or less approxi- 
mate can be made, especially with regard to her future and the true 
plans of the Americans, inasmuch as our continent has within it po- 
tentialities for every facet of development revealed in the history of 
nations, by reason of its physical characteristics and because of the 
hazards of war and the uncertainties of politics. 

As I feel obligated to give due consideration to your esteemed letter 
and to the philanthropic intentions prompting it, I am impelled to 
write you these words, wherein you will certainly not find the bril- 
liant thoughts you seek but rather a candid statement of my ideas. 

Three centuries ago,” you say, “began the atrocities committed by 
the Spaniards on this great hemisphere of Columbus.” Our age has 
rejected these atrocities as mythical, because they appear to be beyond 
the human capacity for evil. Modern critics would never credit them 
were it not for the many and frequent documents testifying to these 
horrible truths. The humane Bishop of Chiapas, that apostle of 
America, Las Casas , 1 has left to posterity a brief description of these 
horrors, extracted from the trial records in Sevilla relating to the 
cases brought against the conquistador es, and containing the testi- 
mony of every respectable person then in the New World, together 
with the charges [procesos], which the tyrants made against each 
other. All this is attested by the foremost historians of that time. 
Every impartial person has admitted the zeal, sincerity, and high 
character of that friend of humanity, who so fervently and so stead- 
fastly denounced to his government and to his contemporaries the 
most horrible acts of sanguinary frenzy. 

With what a feeling of gratitude I read that passage in your letter 
in which you say to me: “I hope that the success which then followed 
Spanish arms may now turn in favor of their adversaries, the badly 
oppressed people of South America.” I take this hope as a prediction, 
if it is justice that determines mans contests. Success will crown our 
efforts, because the destiny of America has been irrevocably decided; 
the tie that bound her to Spain has been severed. Only a concept 
maintained that tie and kept the parts of that immense monarchy 
together. That which formerly bound them now divides them. The 
hatred that the Peninsula has inspired in us is greater than the ocean 

1 Bartolom^ de Las Casas (1 474- 1564), Spanish Dominican missionary and 
“Protector of the Indians” (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR I05 

between us. It would be easier to have the two continents meet than 
to reconcile the spirits of the two countries. The habit of obedience; 
a community of interest, of understanding, of religion; mutual good- 
will; a tender regard for the birthplace and good name of our fore- 
fathers; in short, all that gave rise to our hopes, came to us from Spain. 
As a result there was born a principle of affinity that seemed eternal, 
notwithstanding the misbehavior of our rulers which weakened that 
sympathy, or, rather, that bond enforced by the domination of their 
rule. At present the contrary attitude persists: we are threatened with 
the fear of death, dishonor, and every harm; there is nothing we have 
not suffered at the hands of that unnatural step-mother— Spain. The 
veil has been torn asunder. We have already seen the light, and it is 
not our desire to be thrust back into darkness. The chains have been 
broken; we have been freed, and now our enemies seek to enslave 
us anew. For this reason America fights desperately, and seldom has 
desperation failed to achieve victory. 

Because successes have been partial and spasmodic, we must not 
lose faith. In some regions the Independents triumph, while in 
others the tyrants have the advantage. What is the end result? Is not 
the entire New World in motion, armed for defense? We have but 
to look around us on this hemisphere to witness a simultaneous 
struggle at every point. 

The war-like state of the La Plata River provinces has purged that 
territory and led their victorious armies to Upper Peru, arousing Are- 
quipa and worrying the royalists in Lima. Nearly one million inhabit- 
ants there now enjoy liberty. 

The territory of Chile, populated by 800,000 souls, is fighting the 
enemy who is seeking her subjugation; but to no avail, because those 
who long ago put an end to the conquests of this enemy, the free and 
indomitable Araucanians, are their neighbors and compatriots. Their 
sublime example is proof to those fighting in Chile that a people who 
love independence will eventually achieve it. 

The viceroyalty of Peru, whose population approaches a million and 
a half inhabitants, without doubt suffers the greatest subjection and 
is obliged to make the most sacrifices for the royal cause; and, al- 
though the thought of cooperating with that part of America may be 
vain, the fact remains that it is not tranquil, nor is it capable of 
restraining the torrent that threatens most of its provinces. 

New Granada, which is, so to speak, the heart of America, obeys 
a general government, save for the territory of Quito which is held 
only with the greatest difficulty by its enemies, as it is strongly de- 


io6 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


voted to the country's cause; and the provinces of Panama and Santa 
Marta endure, not without suffering, the tyranny of their masters. 
Two and a half million people inhabit New Granada and are actually 
defending that territory against the Spanish army under General 
Morillo, who will probably suffer defeat at the impregnable fortress 
of Cartagena. But should he take that city, it will be at the price of 
heavy casualties, and he will then lack sufficient forces to subdue 
the unrestrained and brave inhabitants of the interior. 

With respect to heroic and hapless Venezuela, events there have 
moved so rapidly and the devastation has been such that it is re- 
duced to frightful desolation and almost absolute indigence, although 
it was once among the fairest regions that are the pride of America. 
Its tyrants govern a desert, and they oppress only those unfortunate 
survivors who, having escaped death, lead a precarious existence. 
A few women, children, and old men are all that remain. Most of 
the men have perished rather than be slaves; those who survive con- 
tinue to fight furiously on the fields and in the inland towns, until 
they expire or hurl into the sea those who, insatiable in their thirst 
for blood and crimes, rival those first monsters who wiped out 
Americas primitive race. Nearly a million persons formerly dwelt 
in Venezuela, and it is no exaggeration to say that one out of four 
has succumbed either to the land, sword, hunger, plague, flight, or 
privation, all consequences of the war, save the earthquake. 

According to Baron von Humboldt, New Spain, including Guate- 
mala, had 7,800,000 inhabitants in 1808. Since that time, the insur- 
rection, which has shaken virtually all of her provinces, has ap- 
preciably reduced that apparently correct figure, for over a million 
men have perished, as you can see in the report of Mr. Walton, who 
describes faithfully the bloody crimes committed in that abundant 
kingdom. There the struggle continues by dint of human and every 
other type of sacrifice, for the Spaniards spare nothing that might 
enable them to subdue those who have had the misfortune of being 
bom on this soil, which appears to be destined to flow with the blood 
of its offspring. In spite of everything, the Mexicans will be free. 
They have embraced the country's cause, resolved to avenge their 
forefathers or follow them to the grave. Already they say with Ray- 
nal: 1 The time has come at last to repay the Spaniards torture for 

1 The Abb6 Guillaume Thomas Raynal, French philosopher and author of 
Histoire Philosophique et Politique des Etablissements et du Commerce des 
Europeens dans les Deux Indes (Geneva, 1780) (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR I07 

torture and to drown that race of annihilators in its own blood or in 
the sea. 

The islands of Puerto Rico and Cuba, with a combined population 
of perhaps 700,000 to 800,000 souls, are the most tranquil possessions 
of the Spaniards, because they are not within range of contact with 
the Independents. But are not the people of those islands Americans? 
Are they not maltreated? Do they not desire a better life? 

This picture represents, on a military map, an area of 2,000 longi- 
tudinal and 900 latitudinal leagues at its greatest point, wherein 
16,000,000 Americans either defend their rights or suffer repression 
at the hands of Spain, which, although once the world’s greatest 
empire, is now too weak, with what little is left her, to rule the new 
hemisphere or even to maintain herself in the old. And shall Europe, 
the civilized, the merchant, the lover of liberty allow an aged ser- 
pent, bent only on satisfying its venomous rage, devour the fairest 
part of our globe? What! Is Europe deaf to the clamor of her own 
interests? Has she no eyes to see justice? Has she grown so hardened 
as to become insensible? The more I ponder these questions, the 
more I am confused. I am led to think that America’s disappearance 
is desired; but this is impossible because all Europe is not Spain. 
What madness for our enemy to hope to reconquer America when 
she has no navy, no funds, and almost no soldiers! Those troops 
which she has are scarcely adequate to keep her own people in a 
state of forced obedience and to defend herself from her neighbors. 
On the other hand, can that nation carry on the exclusive commerce 
of one-half the world when it lacks manufactures, agricultural prod- 
ucts, crafts and sciences, and even a policy? Assume that this mad 
venture were successful, and further assume that pacification ensued, 
would not the sons of the Americans of today, together with the 
sons of the European reccmquistadores twenty years hence, conceive 
the same patriotic designs that are now being fought for? 

Europe could do Spain a service by dissuading her from her rash 
obstinacy, thereby at least sparing her the costs she is incurring and 
the blood she is expending. And if she will fix her attention on her 
own precincts she can build her prosperity and power upon more 
solid foundations than doubtful conquests, precarious commerce, and 
forceful exactions from remote and powerful peoples. Europe herself, 
as a matter of common sense policy, should have prepared and exe- 
cuted the project of American independence, not alone because the 
world balance of power so necessitated, but also because this is the 


io8 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


legitimate and certain means through which Europe can acquire 
overseas commercial establishments. A Europe which is not moved by 
the violent passions of vengeance, ambition, and greed, as is Spain, 
would seem to be entided, by all the rules of equity, to make clear 
to Spain where her best interests lie. 

All of the writers who have treated this matter agree on this point. 
Consequendy, we have had reason to hope that the civilized nations 
would hasten to our aid in order that we might achieve that which 
must prove to be advantageous to both hemispheres. How vain has 
been this hope! Not only the Europeans but even our brothers of the 
North have been apathetic bystanders in this struggle which, by its 
very essence, is the most just, and in its consequences the most noble 
and vital of any which have been raised in ancient or in modem 
times. Indeed, can the far-reaching effects of freedom for the hemi- 
sphere which Columbus discovered ever be calculated? 

“The criminal action of Bonaparte,” you say, “in seizing Charles IV 
and Ferdinand VII, the monarchs of that nation which three cen- 
turies ago treacherously imprisoned two rulers of South America, is a 
most evident sign of divine retribution, and, at the same time, posi- 
tive proof that God espouses the just cause of the Americans and will 
grant them independence.” 

It appears that you allude to Montezuma, the ruler of Mexico, who 
was imprisoned by Cortes, and, according to Herrera , 1 was by him 
slain, although Solis 2 3 states that it was the work of the people; and 
to Atahualpa, the Inca of Pern, destroyed by Francisco Pizarro and 
Diego Almagro. The fate of the monarchs of Spain and of America is 
too different to admit a comparison. The former were treated with 
dignity and were kept alive, and eventually they recovered their 
freedom and their throne; whereas the latter suffered unspeakable 
tortures and the vilest of treatment. Quauhtemotzin [Guat£moc], 
Montezuma's successor, was treated as an emperor and crowned, but 
in ridicule and not in honor, so that he might suffer this humiliation 
before being put to torture. A like treatment was accorded the ruler 
of Michoacan, Catzontzin; the zipa of Bogotd, and all the other 
toquis, imas, zipas, ulmenes , caciques, and other Indian dignitaries 
who succumbed before Spain's might. 

1 Antonio de Herrera y Tordesillas (1549-1625), author of Historia general 
de los hechos de los Castellanos en las islas e tierra firme del mar oceano. 4 vols. 

(Madrid, 1601-1613) (ed.). 

3 Antonio de Solis (1610-1686), author of Conquista de Mdjico (Madrid, 
1684) (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


I09 

The case of Ferdinand VII more nearly parallels what happened in 
Chile in 1535 to the ulmen of Copiapd, then ruler of that region. 
The Spaniard Almagro pretended, like Bonaparte, to espouse the 
cause of the legitimate sovereign; he therefore called the other a 
usurper, as did Ferdinand in Spain. Almagro appeared to reestablish 
the legitimate sovereign in his estates but ended by shackling the hap- 
less ulmen and feeding him to the flames without so much as hearing 
his defense. This is similar to the case of Ferdinand VII and his 
usurper: Europe’s monarchs, however, only suffer exile; the ultnen 
of Chile is barbarously put to death. 

“These several months,” you add, “I have given much thought to 
the situation in America and to her hopes for the future. I have a 
great interest in her development, but I lack adequate information re- 
specting her present state and the aspirations of her people. I greatly 
desire to know about the politics of each province, also its peoples, 
and whether they desire a republic or a monarchy; or whether they 
seek to form one unified republic or a single monarchy? If you could 
supply me with this information or suggest the sources I might con- 
sult, I should deem it a very special favor.” 

Generous souls always interest themselves in the fate of a people 
who strive to recover the rights to which the Creator and Nature have 
entitled them, and one must indeed be wedded to error and passion 
not to harbor this noble sentiment. You have given thought to my 
country and are concerned in its behalf, and for your kindness I am 
warmly grateful. 

I have listed the population, which is based on more or less exact 
data, but which a thousand circumstances render deceiving. This 
inaccuracy cannot easily be remedied, because most of the inhabit- 
ants live in rural areas and are often nomadic; they are farmers, herd- 
ers, and migrants, lost amidst thick giant forests, solitary plains, and 
isolated by lakes and mighty streams. Who is capable of compiling 
complete statistics of a land like this? Moreover, the tribute paid by 
the Indians, the punishments of the slaves, the first fruits of the har- 
vest [ 'primicias ], tithes [ diezmas ], and taxes levied on farmers, and 
other impositions have driven the poor Americans from their homes. 
This is not to mention the war of extermination that has already 
taken a toll of nearly an eighth part of the population and frightened 
another large part away. All in all, the difficulties are insuperable, 
and the tally is likely to show only half the true count. 

It is even more difficult to foresee the future fate of the New 
World, to set down its political principles, or to prophesy what man- 


no 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


ner of government it will adopt. Every conjecture relative to America s 
future is, I feel, pure speculation. When mankind was in its infancy, 
steeped in uncertainty, ignorance, and error, was it possible to foresee 
what system it would adopt for its preservation? Who could venture 
to say that a certain nation would be a republic or a monarchy; this 
nation great, that nation small? To my way of thinking, such is our 
own situation. We are a young people. We inhabit a world apart, 
separated by broad seas. We are young in the ways of almost all the 
arts and sciences, although, in a certain manner, we are old in the 
ways of civilized society. I look upon the present state of America 
as similar to that of Rome after its fall. Each part of Rome adopted 
a political system conforming to its interest and situation or was led 
by the individual ambitions of certain chiefs, dynasties, or associations. 
But this important difference exists: those dispersed parts later re- 
established their ancient nations, subject to the changes imposed by 
circumstances or events. But we scarcely retain a vestige of what 
once was; we are, moreover, neither Indian nor European, but a spe- 
cies midway between the legitimate proprietors of this country and the 
Spanish usurpers. In short, though Americans by birth we derive our 
rights from Europe, and we have to assert these rights against the 
rights of the natives, and at the same time we must defend ourselves 
against the invaders. This places us in a most extraordinary and 
involved situation. Notwithstanding that it is a type of divination to 
predict the result of the political course which America is pursuing, 
I shall venture some conjectures which, of course, are colored by my 
enthusiasm and dictated by rational desires rather than by reasoned 
calculations. 

The role of the inhabitants of the American hemisphere has for 
centuries been purely passive. Politically they were non-existent. We 
are still in a position lower than slavery, and therefore it is more 
difficult for us to rise to the enjoyment of freedom. Permit me these 
transgressions in order to establish the issue. States are slaves because 
of either the nature or the misuse of their constitutions; a people is 
therefore enslaved when the government, by its nature or its vices, 
infringes on and usurps the rights of the citizen or subject. Applying 
these principles, we find that America was denied not only its free- 
dom but even an active and effective tyranny. Let me explain. Under 
absolutism there are no recognized limits to the exercise of govern- 
mental powers. The will of the great sultan, khan, bey, and other 
despotic rulers is the supreme law, carried out more or less arbitrarily 
by the lesser pashas, khans, and satraps of Turkey and Persia, who 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


III 


have an organized system of oppression in which inferiors participate 
according to the authority vested in them. To them is entrusted the 
administration of civil, military, political, religious, and tax matters. 
But, after all is said and done, the rulers of Ispahan are Persians; 
the viziers of the Grand Turk are Turks; and the sultans of Tartary 
are Tartars. China does not bring its military leaders and scholars 
from the land of Genghis Khan, her conqueror, notwithstanding 
that the Chinese of today are the lineal descendants of those who 
were reduced to subjection by the ancestors of the present-day Tartars. 

How different is our situation! We have been harassed by a con- 
duct which has not only deprived us of our rights but has kept 
us in a sort of permanent infancy with regard to public affairs. If 
we could at least have managed our domestic affairs and our internal 
administration, we could have acquainted ourselves with the processes 
and mechanics of public affairs. We should also have enjoyed a 
personal consideration, thereby commanding a certain unconscious 
respect from the people, which is so necessary to preserve amidst 
revolutions. That is why I say we have even been deprived of an 
active tyranny, since we have not been permitted to exercise its 
functions. 

Americans today, and perhaps to a greater extent than ever before, 
who live within the Spanish system occupy a position in society no 
better than that of serfs destined for labor, or at best they have no 
more status than that of mere consumers. Yet even this status is sur- 
rounded with galling restrictions, such as being forbidden to grow 
European crops, or to store products which are royal monopolies, or 
to establish factories of a type the Peninsula itself does not possess. 
To this add the exclusive trading privileges, even in articles of prime 
necessity, and the barriers between American provinces, designed to 
prevent all exchange of trade, traffic, and understanding. In short, 
do you wish to know what our future held?— simply the cultivation 
of the fields of indigo, grain, coffee, sugar cane, cacao, and cotton; 
cattle raising on the broad plains; hunting wild game in the jungles; 
digging in the earth to mine its gold— but even these limitations could 
never satisfy the greed of Spain. 

So negative was our existence that I can find nothing comparable 
in any other civilized society, examine as I may the entire history of 
time and the politics of all nations. Is it not an outrage and a violation 
of human rights to expect a land so splendidly endowed, so vast, rich, 
and populous, to remain merely passive? 

As I have just explained, we were cut off and, as it were, re- 


1 12 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


moved from the world in relation to the science of government and 
administration of the state. We were never viceroys or governors, 
save in the rarest of instances; seldom archbishops and bishops; diplo- 
mats never; as military men, only subordinates; as nobles, without 
royal privileges. In brief, we were neither magistrates nor financiers 
and seldom merchants— all in flagrant contradiction to our institutions. 

Emperor Charles V made a papt with the discoverers, conquerors, 
and settlers of America, and this, as Guerra puts it, is our social con- 
tract. The monarchs of Spain made a solemn agreement with them, to 
be carried out on their own account and at their own risk, expressly 
prohibiting them from drawing on the royal treasury. In return, they 
were made the lords of the land, entitled to organize the public ad- 
ministration and act as the court of last appeal, together with many 
other exemptions and privileges that are too numerous to mention. 
The King committed himself never to alienate the American prov- 
inces, inasmuch as he had no jurisdiction but that of sovereign do- 
main. Thus, for themselves and their descendants, the conquistadores 
possessed what were tantamount to feudal holdings. Yet there are 
explicit laws respecting employment in civil, ecclesiastical, and tax- 
raising establishments. These laws favor, almost exclusively, the 
natives of the country who are of Spanish extraction. Thus, by an 
outright violation of the laws and the existing agreements, those 
born in America have been despoiled of their constitutional rights 
as embodied in the code. 

From what I have said it is easy to deduce that America was not 
prepared to secede from the mother country; this secession was sud- 
denly brought about by the effect of the illegal concessions of 
Bayonne 1 and the unrighteous war which the Regency unjustly and 
illegally declared on us. Concerning the nature of the Spanish 
governments, their stringent and hostile decrees, and their long 
record of desperate behavior, you can find articles of real merit, by 
Mr. Blanco, in the newspaper El Espanol . 2 Since this aspect of our 
history is there very well treated, I shall do no more than refer to it. 

The Americans have risen rapidly without previous knowledge of, 
and, what is more regrettable, without previous experience in public 
affairs, to enact upon the world stage the eminent roles of legislator, 
magistrate, minister of the treasury, diplomat, general, and every 

1 Treaty of Bayonne imposed by Napoleon on Spain, May, 1808 (ed.). 

* Joseph Blanco- White, former priest and editor of El Esyanol, who corre- 
sponded with Bolivar (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 113 

position of authority, supreme or subordinate, that comprises the 
hierarchy of a fully organized state. 

When the French invasion, stopped only by the walls of C4diz, 
routed the fragile governments of the Peninsula, we were left or- 
phans. Prior to that invasion, we had been left to the mercy of a 
foreign usurper. Thereafter, the justice due us was dangled before 
our eyes, raising hopes that only came to nought. Finally, uncertain of 
our destiny, and facing anarchy for want of a legitimate, just, and 
liberal government, we threw ourselves headlong into the chaos of 
revolution. Attention was first given to obtaining domestic security 
against enemies within our midst, and then it was extended to the 
procuring of external security. Authorities were set up to replace 
those we had deposed, empowered to direct the course of our revolu- 
tion and to take full advantage of the fortunate turn of events; thus 
we were able to found a constitutional government worthy of our 
century and adequate to our situation. 

The first steps of all the new governments are marked by the estab- 
lishment of juntas of the people. These juntas speedily draft rules 
for the calling of congresses, which produce great changes. Vene- 
zuela erected a democratic and federal government, after declaring 
for the rights of man. A system of checks and balances was estab- 
lished, and general laws were passed granting civil liberties, such as 
freedom of the press and others. In short, an independent government 
was created. New Granada uniformly followed the political institu- 
tions and reforms introduced by Venezuela, taking as the funda- 
mental basis of her constitution the most elaborate federal system 
ever to be brought into existence. Recently the powers of the chief 
executive have been increased, and he has been given all the powers 
that are properly his. I understand that Buenos Aires and Chile have 
followed this same line of procedure, but, as the distance is so great 
and documents are so few and the news reports so unreliable, I 
shall not attempt even briefly to sketch their progress. 

Events in Mexico have been too varied, confused, swift, and un- 
happy to follow clearly the course of that revolution. We lack, 
moreover, the necessary documentary information to enable us to 
form a judgment. The Independents of Mexico, according to our 
information, began their insurrection in September, 1810, and a year 
later they erected a central government in Zitacuaro, where a na- 
tional junta was installed under the auspices of Ferdinand VII, in 
whose name the government was carried on. The events of the war 


1 14 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

caused this junta to move from place to place; and, having undergone 
such modifications as events have determined, it may still be in 
existence. 

It is reported that a generalissimo or dictator [sic] has been ap- 
pointed and that he is the illustrious General Morelos, though others 
mention the celebrated General Rayon. It is certain that one or both 
of these two great men exercise the supreme authority in that coun- 
try. And recently a constitution has been created as a framework of 
government. In March, 1812 , the government, then residing in 
Zultepec, submitted a plan for peace and war to the Viceroy of 
Mexico that had been conceived with the utmost wisdom. It ac- 
claimed the law of nations and established principles that are true 
and beyond question. The junta proposed that the war be fought 
as between brothers and countrymen; that it need not be more cruel 
than a war between foreign nations; that the rules of nations and of 
war, held inviolable even by infidels and barbarians, must be more 
binding upon Christians, who are, moreover, subject to one sovereign 
and to the same laws; that prisoners not be treated as guilty of 
Use majeste , nor those surrendering arms slain, but rather held as 
hostages for exchange; and that peaceful towns not be put to fire 
and sword. The junta concluded its proposal by warning that if this 
plan were not accepted rigorous reprisal would be taken. This pro- 
posal was received with scorn: no reply was made to the national 
junta . The original communications were publicly burned in the 
plaza in Mexico City by the executioner, and the Spaniards have 
continued the war of extermination with their accustomed fury; 
meanwhile, the Mexicans and the other American nations have re- 
frained from instituting a war to the death respecting Spanish 
prisoners. Here it can be seen that as a matter of expediency an ap- 
pearance of allegiance to the King and even to the Constitution of 
the monarchy has been maintained. The national junta , it appears, 
is absolute in the exercise of the legislative, executive, and judicial 
powers, and its membership is very limited. 

Events in Costa Firme have proved that institutions which are 
wholly representative are not suited to our character, customs, and 
present knowledge. In Caracas party spirit arose in the societies, 
assemblies, and popular elections; these parties led us back into 
slavery. Thus, while Venezuela has been the American republic with 
the most advanced political institutions, she has also been the clearest 
example of the inefficacy of the democratic and federal system for 
our new-born states. In New Granada, the large number of excess 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


15 


powers held by the provincial governments and the lack of centraliza- 
tion in the general government have reduced that fair country to her 
present state. For this reason her foes, though weak, have been able 
to hold out against all odds. As long as our countrymen do not acquire 
the abilities and political virtues that distinguish our brothers of the 
north, wholly popular systems, far from working to our advantage, 
will, I gready fear, bring about our downfall. Unfortunately, these 
traits, to the degree in which they are required, do not appear to be 
within our reach. On the contrary, we are dominated by the vices 
that one learns under the rule of a nation like Spain, which has only 
distinguished itself in ferocity, ambition, vindictiveness, and greed. 

It is harder, Montesquieu has written, to release a nation from 
servitude than to enslave a free nation. This truth is proven by the 
annals of all times, which reveal that most free nations have been 
put under the yoke, but very few enslaved nations have recovered 
their liberty. Despite the convictions of history, South Americans 
have made efforts to obtain liberal, even perfect, institutions, doubt- 
less out of that instinct to aspire to the greatest possible happiness, 
which, common to all men, is bound to follow in civil societies 
founded on the principles of justice, liberty, and equality. But are 
we capable of maintaining in proper balance the difficult charge of 
a republic? Is it conceivable that a newly emancipated people can 
soar to the heights of liberty, and, unlike Icarus, neither have its 
wings melt nor fall into an abyss? Such a marvel is inconceivable and 
without precedent. There is no reasonable probability to bolster our 
hopes. 

More than anyone, I desire to see America fashioned into the 
greatest nation in the world, greatest not so much by virtue of her 
area and wealth as by her freedom and glory. Although I seek per- 
fection for the government of my country, I cannot persuade myself 
that the New World can, at the moment, be organized as a great 
republic. Since it is impossible, I dare not desire it; yet much less do 
I desire to have all America a monarchy because this plan is not 
only impracticable but also impossible. Wrongs now existing could 
not be righted, and our emancipation would be fruitless. The 
American states need the care of paternal governments to heal the 
sores and wounds of despotism and war. The parent country, for 
example, might be Mexico, the only country fitted for the position 
by her intrinsic strength, and without such power there can be no 
parent country. Let us assume it were to be the Isthmus of Panamd, 
the most central point of this vast continent. Would not all parts 


Il6 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

continue in their lethargy and even in their present disorder? For a 
single government to infuse life into the New World; to put into use 
all the resources for public prosperity; to improve, educate, and per- 
fect the New World, that government would have to possess the 
authority of a god, much less the knowledge and virtues of mankind. 

The party spirit that today keeps our states in constant agitation 
would assume still greater proportions were a central power estab- 
lished, for that power— the only force capable of checking this agi- 
tation— would be elsewhere. Furthermore, the chief figures of the 
capitals would not tolerate the preponderance of leaders at the 
metropolis, for they would regard these leaders as so many tyrants. 
Their resentments would attain such heights that they would com- 
pare the latter to the hated Spaniards. Any such monarchy would 
be a misshapen colossus that would collapse of its own weight at the 
slightest disturbance. 

Mr. de Pradt 1 has wisely divided America into fifteen or seven- 
teen mutually independent states, governed by as many monarchs. 
I am in agreement on the first suggestion, as America can well 
tolerate seventeen nations; as to the second, though it could easily be 
achieved, it would serve no purpose. Consequently, I do not favor 
American monarchies. My reasons are these: The well-understood 
interest of a republic is limited to the matter of its preservation, pros- 
perity, and glory. Republicans, because they do not desire powers 
which represent a directly contrary viewpoint, have no reason for 
expanding the boundaries of their nation to the detriment of their 
own resources, solely for the purpose of having their neighbors share 
a liberal constitution. They would not acquire rights or secure any 
advantage by conquering their neighbors, unless they were to make 
them colonies, conquered territory, or allies, after the example of 
Rome. But such thought and action are directly contrary to the 
principles of justice which characterize republican systems; and, 
what is more, they are in direct opposition to the interests of their 
citizens, because a state, too large of itself or together with its depend- 
encies, ultimately falls into decay. Its free government becomes a 
tyranny. The principles that should preserve the government are dis- 
regarded, and finally it degenerates into despotism. The distinctive 
feature of small republics is permanence: that of large republics 
varies, but always with a tendency toward empire. Almost all small 
republics have had long lives. Among the larger republics, only 

1 The Abb£ de Pradt, French writer and publicist, wrote numerous works 
favoring Spanish-American independence and corresponded with Bolivar (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


117 

Rome lasted for several centuries, for its capital was a republic. The 
rest of her dominions were governed by divers laws and institutions. 

The policy of a king is very different. His constant desire is to 
increase his possessions, wealth, and authority; and with justification, 
for his power grows with every acquisition, both with respect to his 
neighbors and his own vassals, who fear him because his power is 
as formidable as his empire, which he maintains by war and con- 
quest. For these reasons I think that the Americans, being anxious 
for peace, science, art, commerce, and agriculture, would prefer re- 
publics to kingdoms. And, further, it seems to me that these desires 
conform with the aims of Europe. 

We know little about the opinions prevailing in Buenos Aires, 
Chile, and Peru. Judging by what seeps through and by conjecture, 
Buenos Aires will have a central government in which the military, 
as a result of its internal dissensions and external wars, will have the 
upper hand. Such a constitutional system will necessarily degenerate 
into an oligarchy or a monocracy, with a variety of restrictions the 
exact nature of which no one can now foresee. It would be unfortu- 
nate if this situation were to follow because the people there deserve 
a more glorious destiny. 

The Kingdom of Chile is destined, by the nature of its location, by 
the simple and virtuous character of its people, and by the example 
of its neighbors, the proud republicans of Arauco , 1 to enjoy the bless- 
ings that flow from the just and gentle laws of a republic. If any 
American republic is to have a long life, I am inclined to believe it 
will be Chile. There the spirit of liberty has never been extin- 
guished; the vices of Europe and Asia arrived too late or not at all to 
corrupt the customs of that distant corner of the world. Its area is 
limited; and, as it is remote from other peoples, it will always re- 
main free from contamination. Chile will not alter her laws, ways, 
and practices. She will preserve her uniform political and religious 
views. In a word, it is possible for Chile to be free. 

Peru, on the contrary, contains two factors that clash with every 
just and liberal principle: gold and slaves. The former corrupts 
everything; the latter are themselves corrupt. The soul of a serf can 
seldom really appreciate true freedom. Either he loses his head in 
uprisings or his self-respect in chains. Although these remarks would 
be applicable to all America, I believe that they apply with greater 
justice to Lima, for the reasons I have given and because of the 


1 The Araucanian Indians, long noted for their spirit of independence (ed.). 


iz8 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


cooperation she has rendered her masters against her own brothers, 
those illustrious sons of Quito, Chile, and Buenos Aires. It is plain 
that he who aspires to obtain liberty will at least attempt to secure 
it. I imagine that in Lima the rich will not tolerate democracy, nor 
will the freed slaves and pardos accept aristocracy. The former will 
prefer the tyranny of a single man, to avoid the tumult of rebellion 
and to provide, at least, a peaceful system. If Peru intends to recover 
her independence, she has much to do. 

From the foregoing, we can draw these conclusions: The American 
provinces are fighting for their freedom, and they will ultimately 
succeed. Some provinces as a matter of course will form federal and 
some central republics; the larger areas will inevitably establish 
monarchies, some of which will fare so badly that they will disinte- 
grate in either present or future revolutions. To consolidate a great 
monarchy will be no easy task, but it will be utterly impossible to 
consolidate a great republic. 

It is a grandiose idea to think of consolidating the New World 
into a single nation, united by pacts into a single bond. It is reasoned 
that, as these parts have a common origin, language, customs, and 
religion, they ought to have a single government to permit the newly 
formed states to unite in a confederation. But this is not possible. 
Actually, America is separated by climatic differences, geographic 
diversity, conflicting interests, and dissimilar characteristics. How 
beautiful it would be if the Isthmus of Panamd could be for us 
what the Isthmus of Corinth was for the Greeks! Would to God that 
some day we may have the good fortune to convene there an august 
assembly of representatives of republics, kingdoms, and empires 
to deliberate upon the high interests of peace and war with the na- 
tions of the other three-quarters of the globe. This type of organiza- 
tion may come to pass in some happier period of our regeneration. 
But any other plan, such as that of Abbe St. Pierre, who in laudable 
delirium conceived the idea of assembling a European congress to 
decide the fate and interests of those nations, would be meaningless. 

Among the popular and representative systems, I do not favor the 
federal system. It is over-perfect, and it demands political virtues and 
talents far superior to our own. For the same reason I reject a mon- 
archy that is part aristocracy and part democracy, although with 
such a government England has achieved much fortune and splendor. 
Since it is not possible for us to select the most perfect and complete 
form of government, let us avoid falling into demagogic anarchy or 
monocratic tyranny. These opposite extremes would only wreck us 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


119 

on similar reefs of misfortune and dishonor; hence, we must seek 
a mean between them. I say: Do not adopt the best system of govern- 
ment, but the one that is most likely to succeed. 

By the nature of their geographic location, wealth, population, 
and character, I expect that the Mexicans, at the outset, intend to 
establish a representative republic in which the executive will have 
great powers. These will be concentrated in one person, who, if he 
discharges his duties with wisdom and justice, should almost certainly 
maintain his authority for life. If through incompetence or violence 
he should excite a popular revolt and it should be successful, this 
same executive power would then, perhaps, be distributed among the 
members of an assembly. If the dominant party is military or aristo- 
cratic, it will probably demand a monarchy that would be limited 
and constitutional at the outset, and would later inevitably degener- 
ate into an absolute monarchy; for it must be admitted that there is 
nothing more difficult in the political world than the maintenance of 
a limited monarchy. Moreover, it must also be agreed that only a 
people as patriotic as the English are capable of controlling the 
authority of a king and of sustaining the spirit of liberty under the 
rule of sceptre and crown. 

The states of the Isthmus of Panamd, as far as Guatemala, will per- 
haps form a confederation. Because of their magnificent position 
between two mighty oceans, they may in time become the emporium 
of the world. Their canals will shorten distances throughout the 
world, strengthen commercial ties between Europe, America, and 
Asia, and bring to that happy area tribute from the four quarters of 
the globe. There some day, perhaps, the capital of the world may be 
located — reminiscent of the Emperor Constantine’s claim that Byzan- 
tium was the capital of the ancient world. 

New Granada will unite with Venezuela, if they can agree to the 
establishment of a central republic. Their capital may be Maracaibo 
or a new city to be named Las Casas 0 n honor of that humane hero) 
to be built on the borders of the two countries, in the excellent port 
area of Bahia-Honda. This location, though little known, is the 
most advantageous in all respects. It is readily accessible, and its situa- 
tion is so strategic that it can be made impregnable. It has a fine, 
healthful climate, a soil as suitable for agriculture as for cattle raising, 
and a superabundance of good timber. The Indians living there can 
be civilized, and our territorial possessions could be increased with 
the acquisition of the Goajira Peninsula. This nation should be 
called Colombia as a just and grateful tribute to the discoverer of 


120 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


our hemisphere. Its government might follow the English pattern, 
except that in place of a king there will be an executive who will be 
elected, at most, for life, but his office will never be hereditary, if 
a republic is desired. There will be a hereditary legislative chamber 
or senate. This body can interpose itself between the violent demands 
of the people and the great powers of the government during periods 
of political unrest. The second representative body will be a legisla- 
ture with restrictions no greater than those of the lower house in 
England. The Constitution will draw on all systems of government, 
but I do not want it to partake of all their vices. As Colombia is my 
country, I have an indisputable right to desire for her that form of 
government which, in my opinion, is best. It is very possible that 
New Granada may not care to recognize a central government, be- 
cause she is greatly addicted to federalism; in such event, she will 
form a separate state which, if it endures, may prosper, because of its 
great and varied resources. 

“Great and beneficial changes,” you say, “can frequently be 
brought about through the efforts of individuals.” The South Ameri- 
cans have a tradition to this effect: When Quetzalcoatl, the Hermes 
or Buddha of South America, gave up his ministry and left his people, 
he promised them he would return at an ordained time to reestablish 
his government and revive their prosperity. Does not this tradition 
foster a conviction that he may shortly reappear? Can you imagine 
the result if an individual were to appear among these people, bear- 
ing the features of Quetzalcoatl, their Buddha of the forest, or those 
of Mercury, of whom other nations have spoken? Do you suppose 
that this would affect all regions of America? Is it not unity alone 
that is needed to enable them to expel the Spaniards, their troops, and 
the supporters of corrupt Spain and to establish in these regions a 
powerful empire with a free government and benevolent laws? 

Like you, I believe that the specific actions of individuals can pro- 
duce general results, especially in revolutions. But is that hero, that 
great prophet or God of Anahuac, Quetzalcoatl, capable of effecting 
the prodigious changes that you propose? This esteemed figure is not 
well known, if at all, by the Mexican people : such is the fate of the 
defeated, even if they be gods. Historians and writers, it is true, 
have undertaken a careful investigation of his origin, the truth or 
falsity of his doctrine, his prophesies, and the account of his depar- 
ture from Mexico. Whether he was an apostle of Christ or a pagan 
is openly debated. Some would associate his name with St. Thomas; 
others, with the Feathered Serpent; while still others say he is the 


SELECTED WRITINGS OE BOLIVAR 


121 


famous prophet of Yucatdn, Chilan-Cambal. In a word, most Mexi- 
can authors, polemicists, and secular historians have discussed, at k 
greater or lesser length, the question of the true character of Quet- 
zalcoatl. The fact is, according to the historian, Father Acosta, that 
he established a religion which, in its rites, dogmas, and mysteries, 
bore a remarkable similarity to the religion of Jesus, the faith that it 
probably most resembles. Nevertheless, many Catholic writers have 
tried to dismiss the idea that he was a true prophet, and they refuse 
to associate him with St. Thomas, as other celebrated writers have 
done. The general opinion is that Quetzalcoatl was a divine law-giver 
among the pagan peoples of Anahuac; that their great Montezuma 
was his lieutenant, deriving his power from that divinity. Hence it 
may be inferred that our Mexicans would not follow the pagan 
Quetzalcoatl, however ingratiating the guise in which he might 
appear, for they profess the most intolerant and exclusive of all reli- 
gions. 

Happily, the leaders of the Mexican independence movement have 
made use of this fanaticism to excellent purpose by proclaiming the 
famous Virgin of Guadalupe the Queen of the Patriots, invoking her 
name in all difficult situations and placing her image on their 
banners. As a result, political enthusiasms have been commingled 
with religion, thus producing an intense devotion to the sacred cause 
of liberty. The veneration of this image in Mexico is greater than 
the exaltation that the most sagacious prophet could inspire. 

Surely unity is what we need to complete our work of regenera- 
tion. The division among us, nevertheless, is nothing extraordinary, 
for it is characteristic of civil wars to form two parties, conservatives 
and reformers . The former are commonly the more numerous, be- 
cause the weight of habit induces obedience to established powers; 
the latter are always fewer in number although more vocal and 
learned. Thus, the physical mass of the one is counterbalanced by 
the moral force of the other; the contest is prolonged, and the re- 
sults are uncertain. Fortunately, in our case, the mass has followed 
the learned. 

I shall tell you with what we must provide ourselves in order to 
expel the Spaniards and to found a free government. It is union , 
obviously; but such union will come about through sensible planning 
and well-directed actions rather than by divine magic. America 
stands together because it is abandoned by all other nations. It is 
isolated in the center of the world. It has no diplomatic relations, 
nor does it receive any military assistance; instead, America is 


122 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


attacked by Spain, which has more military supplies than any we 
can possibly acquire through furtive means. 

When success is not assured, when the state is weak, and when 
results are distantly seen, all men hesitate; opinion is divided, 
passions rage, and the enemy fans these passions in order to win an 
easy victory because of them. As soon as we are strong and under 
the guidance of a liberal nation which will lend us her protection, 
we will achieve accord in cultivating the virtues and talents that lead 
to glory. Then will we march majestically toward that great pros- 
perity for which South America is destined. Then will those sciences 
and arts which, bom in the East, have enlightened Europe, wing 
their way to a free Colombia, which will cordially bid them wel- 
come. 

Such, Sir, are the thoughts and observations that I have the honor 
to submit to you, so that you may accept or reject them according 
to their merit. I beg you to understand that I have expounded them 
because I do not wish to appear discourteous and not because I con- 
sider myself competent to enlighten you concerning these matters. 

I am, Sir, etc., etc. 

Sim6n Bolivar 


42. To the Editor, The Royal Gazette , Kingston, Jamaica 
[The Royal Gazette, September 28 to 30, 1815] 

Kingston, September 28, 1815. 

Dear Sir: 

In The Courant of the 27th of this month I have read an article 
on New Granada which is very interesting both with regard to what 
it says about the population and resources of that country and re- 
specting its observations on the dissensions that have there existed. 

The author of the article appears to be impartial and his opinions 
are well-founded, but I would have desired more detail and greater 
clarity respecting the true causes of the civil war, which have in- 
duced General Morillo to land on those shores and attack Cartagena. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


I2 3 

The results of this operation will probably decide the fate of a large 
part of the continent. 

I am submitting to you some observations which, in a manner of 
speaking, may explain the conduct of the people of New Granada 
and perhaps throw light on the possible outcome of the contest be- 
tween them and the forces of Spain. As a South American, I feel 
obliged, in part, to mention certain facts concerning the nature of 
our civil wars. 

Virtually every republic that has inspired great veneration among 
the human race has borne within it the seed of fatal discord; hence 
it has been said that dissension is often the measuring-rod of liberty, 
and that the enjoyment of a liberally constituted government is 
commonly found to be in direct proportion to the enthusiasm of the 
parties and the clash of political opinions. It is true that the influ- 
ence of liberty is unsteady, but it is also difficult to assess its value 
within the most civilized and enlightened nations. 

What free nation, ancient or modern, has not suffered dissension? 
Can you point to a history more turbulent than that of Athens— 
factions more sanguinary than those of Rome— civil wars of greater 
violence than those of England— or disturbances more dangerous 
than those of the United States of North America? Nevertheless, 
these are the four nations that honor mankind most by their virtues, 
their liberty, and their glory. In citing the tragic and startling ex- 
amples that these nations afford us, I should like to lessen the shame 
of our own internal cleavage. 

Our discord had its origin in the two most productive sources of 
national disaster: ignorance and weakness. Spain cultivated the 
first with superstition and perpetuated the second with tyranny. In 
our former situation, we were kept in a condition of almost total 
insignificance. We lived removed from all that occurred, rarely 
contemplating the world of political affairs; and we were separated 
from everything that might in any way have stimulated our intelli- 
gence or improved our resources and power. The South Americans 
traversed the centuries like blind men in a world of color. They 
found themselves on the field of action with bandaged eyes: they 
could see nothing, hear nothing. Why? Because they had never 
been permitted to see justice, much less hear the truth. 

Furthermore, we were abandoned by the entire world. No foreign 
nation ever aided us with its wisdom and experience, defended us 
with its arms, or encouraged us with its resources. This was not so in 
the case of North America, during her struggle for independence. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


124 

Although that country possessed advantages superior to ours, the 
three most powerful nations of Europe, all colonial powers, helped 
her win independence. Great Britain, nevertheless, has not taken 
reprisal against the Spain which fought against her in the war that 
cost the former her colonies. Every recourse, military and political, 
denied to us has been made abundantly available to our enemies. To 
cite only one example, The Courant of Jamaica, and La Gaceta de 
Santiago de la Vega , copying from the former, have published the 
list of arms, munitions, and clothing that the Spanish have received. 
The very victories of the great and immortal Wellington have been, 
indirectly, fatal favors to us since the Spaniards, who were ignorant 
of the art of war, learned it from the heroic British army commanded 
by that illustrious soldier who, at one time, intended to help liberate 
South America. These are the strange facts that history will record, 
along with others equally strange and too numerous to recount. 

The United States of North America, which, through her com- 
merce, could have supplied us with war materials, did not do so 
because of her war with Great Britain. Otherwise, Venezuela could 
have triumphed by herself, and South America would not have been 
laid waste by Spanish cruelty or ruined by revolutionary anarchy. 
We have had no weapons with which to oppose the enemy other 
than our hands, our backs, our horses, and our lances. The weak 
must struggle long to win; the strong, as at Waterloo, wage one battle 
and obliterate an empire. 

When a party lacks authority, whether for want of strength or 
because of the triumph of its opponents, discontent follows, which 
further weakens it. The party heads divide the cause into as many 
parts as there are leaders; this division is more certain to occur when 
there is no understanding with a foreign power to keep them within 
the framework which both countries have recognized and are obliged 
to sustain. As no nation has negotiated formal treaties or entered 
into official communication with us, we have no political ties to 
link us with any nation. 

In New Granada, the federal Constitution and the abuse that 
it suffered left the executive power in such a state of fatal weakness 
that its efforts were checkmated by the provinces that should have 
cooperated with it. Until the province of Cundinamarca recently 
submitted to the over-all general government, it exhibited a spirit of 
unfairness and a lack of cooperation which future generations will 
find hard to believe. Moreover, the province of Cartagena disobeyed 
the Congress whenever it seemed convenient. Recently it not only 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


125 

disobeyed but warred against the troops of the general government 
that had been sent to liberate the province of Santa Marta and 
Venezuela. But, astounding as these facts appear, they cease to be 
so when viewed in their proper light. 

Fortunately the general government of New Granada has re- 
gained all the power that stems from its authority. It has organized 
an army and earned the people's confidence, which is so essential 
in a country agitated by such violent passions. 

I cannot believe that the Spanish forces besieging Cartagena will 
force her to surrender, but, assuming that they do succeed, it will 
be at the sacrifice of most of the troops engaged and after a long 
period of time. In the meanwhile, the general government will have 
strengthened itself in the interior and will have raised troops capable 
not only of destroying the Spanish army but of besieging it in turn 
at the gates of Cartagena. The South Americans today fear only 
tyranny. Their spirit has been lifted. Spain's persecutions have given 
them the strength they needed. To love of country, to the virtues 
that they could not acquire under the regime of absolutism, have 
been added a deep-seated aversion for their enemies and a terrible 
desperation that almost always makes for victory. 

If we now turn our attention to Venezuela, we will see that her 
people, almost annihilated, unarmed, and oppressed, are battling with 
such force and violence that, having seized all the inland provinces, 
they now stand ready to attack the ports and drive their enemies into 
the sea, according to the latest advices that we have received. 

New Granada will not surrender to the troops commanded by 
General Morillo, because, first, Cartagena is too strong for the num- 
ber of men under his command; second, the country, vast and well 
populated, is resolved to resist the invaders; and third, the Vene- 
zuelan patriots will not give the Spaniards time to conquer when 
they can barely, and with the greatest difficulty, hold the territory 
they now occupy. 

To think otherwise is an illusion, as time will prove. Spain does 
not have sufficient forces available, nor does she have the means of 
transporting them in order to again subjugate all South America 
and Mexico. Her present attempt to do so is futile. She will not gain 
possession of any place of importance; much less will she achieve 
victory through the cruel and fierce conduct which she has adopted 
toward the hapless Americans whom she has held subject to her 
ignominious and unbearable yoke. 

I am, Mr. Editor, very respectfully yours, 


Bolivar 


126 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


43. To Ignacio Cavero and Maxwell Hyslop, Commissioners 
of the Government of Cartagena 

[Blanco y Aspunia, V, 365] 

Kingston, December 2, 1815. 

Gentlemen: 

I have the honor of replying to your official letter of this date, ad- 
dressed to me and enclosing a copy of the communication which 
you have sent to His Excellency, the Governor of Cartagena. 

Kindly accept my sincere expression of gratitude for the honor 
you have done me in referring to me in a manner which I do not 
merit. I am fully convinced that only an excess of kindness could 
have prompted you to a commendation such as I had not dared hope 
for, notwithstanding the fact that I am fired with an overwhelming 
ambition to serve my country. I can say positively that no obstacle, 
no danger deters me, save the fear lest my presence should revive 
the differences that drove me from Cartagena. You know that I 
voluntarily accepted ostracism in order to promote public tran- 
quility and to avert domestic conflict. There might, perhaps, at this 
time be danger if I were, unexpectedly, to enter a town that is 
surrounded by the enemy and greatly distressed by the dire con- 
sequences of a siege. In such a situation, the slightest internal dis- 
turbance becames an imminent risk. Moreover, I do not think that 
I possess the qualities you so graciously attribute to me, and, on the 
contrary, I believe that the General now in command of the army 
defending Cartagena possesses, in the highest degree, the traits that 
befit a soldier: courage, disinterestedness, patriotism, energy, zeal, 
and military ability. 

Though I do not have the slightest confidence in myself; though 
I am virtually terrified by the tremendous responsibility with which 
you desire to honor me, in inviting me to help in the defense of 
Cartagena; and though all the dangers that I have previously en- 
countered may again combine against me, I am ready to serve my 
country. If Cartagena should call me, I would fly to defend her or 
to seek my tomb among her ruins! 

But, while the feelings of her inhabitants are not in perfect ac- 
cord, my presence there might perhaps be the occasion for disputes 
and difficulties. I should not then be of any help, even within the 
range of my authority. 

Never will I be able to express the satisfaction I feel from your 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


12 7 


offering me the opportunity to express my innermost sentiments with 
respect to those who once called themselves enemies of mine though 
I was no enemy of theirs. I am incapable of harboring in my heart 
a fratricidal fury, and I cannot share any of the criminal hatred that 
is inflamed by civil strife. I should consider myself descended to the 
level of the cruel and perfidious Spaniards if I were to hate my coun- 
trymen, those brothers for whom I have so often fought and whose 
freedom is my only passion. No American can be my enemy, even 
when he fights against me under the flag of the tyrants. Not being, 
therefore, susceptible to sentiments of hate, and feeling only as the 
gentlest of lovers toward my cherished country, I say, on my sacred 
word of honor, that I have forgotten the offenses of those who, misled 
no doubt by error, thought to do me harm— any thought of revenge 
is foreign to my heart. 

I trust that you will kindly receive my sincere expression of high 
esteem for yourselves and the government for whom you speak. 

May God keep you many years. 

Sim6n Bolivar 


44. To [Addressee unknown] 

[Original] 1 

Los Cayos, December 26, 1815. 

My esteemed friend: 

I am pleased to advise you of my safe arrival in this port on the 
24th of this month. 

My friends Bri6n, Duran, and all others here who are lovers of 
America have received me with many signs of friendship. I have 
begun to discuss with them our plan, in connection with which I 
intend to leave tomorrow for Port-au-Prince. 

During the crossing, I spoke with the captain of the Cartagenan 
privateer schooner, La Republicana. He had been bound for your 
port, but he veered in the direction of this island after he encountered 
us. The captain told us that the city had been evacuated on the 5th 


1 From the collection of Victor F. Schroeter, New York City (comp.). 


128 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


of this month, that a large number of the population were depart- 
ing, and that the entire garrison with its arms was fleeing by sea. I 
doubt the accuracy of this report, because upon my arrival here no 
such event was known, nor did we meet up with any other boat 
with refugees, though the captain himself had said that others were 
making their way to this port. Even were this true, it would not 
stop me from exerting my efforts in behalf of my country. The 
remnants of the troops of Cartagena, the men who have emigrated, 
the weapons they may have saved, and the ships in which they may 
come will provide me with many resources with which to attack at 
a different point, and perhaps with greater success. The loss of 
Cartagena does not decide the fate of New Granada; in taking that 
city the Spaniards will weaken themselves, as they will have to re- 
duce their army in order to form a strong garrison to hold it. In 
short, I believe that, even if this tragic report is confirmed, our plan 
can proceed, and we can still somewhat advance the cause of Amer- 
ica by our efforts. Thus, I am not discouraged, but I trust that my 
friends will not abandon me. 

I do not know when I shall return from Port-au-Prince, but 
wherever I am I will take care to keep you informed of the progress 
I make and the opportunities open to us. 

Believe me to be your affectionate friend and servant, 

SIMON BOLIVAR 


1816 


45. To Luis Bri6n, Admiral of the Venezuelan Navy 
[ Original ] 

Port-au-Prince, January 2, 1816. 

My dear friend: 

I finally arrived here the night before last; as yesterday was a 
holiday I could not see the President. 1 I have just now paid him a 
visit, which has given me much pleasure, as you may well imagine. 
The President impressed me, as he does everyone, very favorably. 
His countenance reflects the kindness of character for which he is 
well known. I hope for much from his love of liberty and justice. 
As yet, I have not been able to converse with him except in general 
terms. As soon as I can go into details, I shall do so with all the 
reserve and moderation our unhappy position demands. I shall keep 
you informed of everything with the candor that I owe and have 
promised you. 

I am writing to our friends under this date, telling them much the 
same that I am telling you concerning our common cause. If any- 
thing of importance occurs I shall send word to you by a personal 
messenger. Meantime, I expect that you will do the same for me. 
I beg you, in passing, to get your forces together so that we may 
effect some useful enterprise on the Costa Firme. 

I have asked that the schooner intended for you be sent to the 
port where our refugees are, as you suggested. 

Here it is remarkably peaceful. All are sorely grieved by the loss 
of Cartagena, although they hope to see our plans put into action 
once again. There is much talk of a war between the United States 
and Spain, which would be extremely fortunate for us in all respects. 

I imagine that the refugees have already appeared where you are, 
and doubtless they are in a sad enough state. Have patience; we are 
adopting measures to remedy our ills. Let us build a country at all 
costs, and then everything will become bearable. 


1 Alexandre Potion (1770-1818) (ed.). 


I 3° SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

Good-bye, my dear friend. Please accept our friendship and esteem, 
and believe me to be your most affectionate friend. 

SIMON BOLIVAR 


46. To General Juan Bautista Pardo, Spanish 
Commander at Pampatar 

[Copy] 

General Headquarters, Margarita, May 17, 1816. 

General : 

Charged by my fellow-citizens to direct their struggle against the 
unspeakable tyranny of the Spanish government in Venezuela, I feel 
that it is my duty to begin this campaign with a generous act of 
humanity by sparing the prisoners of the naval forces that have 
blockaded this island, and by ending on our part the war to the 
death that dishonors Spain and desolates America. In consequence, 
the laws of warfare will reassume their full force, not to mention 
the law of nations, which heretofore has been so horribly outraged. 

The enclosed declaration, which I have the honor of addressing 
to you, is an eternal monument to our forbearance. 

The true soldier glories only in the defeat of his enemies, not in 
their destruction. You are a military man of honor, and, moreover, 
you are a son of America; you will not, then, desire to prolong the 
war of extermination that is being waged against us. 

The fortunes of war are completely inclined in our favor. We 
hold nearly all of this island of Margarita, and its inhabitants have 
all enlisted under our flags. We have arms and munitions for many 
years, and the superiority of our navy is apparent. You are now 
blockaded, and you will shordy be besieged and taken by assault. 
The garrison of Pampatar is helpless; it cannot make a successful 
defense against my forces. Your garrison will be an unpardonable 
victim of blind obstinacy, unless, pursuant to the laws of humanity 
and war, you avoid the useless destruction of your unfortunate com- 
rades by an honorable surrender. 

I should regret it if posterity were to attribute to me the blood 


o 























SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


131 

soon to be spilled in Venezuela and New Granada; but I shall con- 
sole myself with the knowledge that I have left authentic documents 
of my humanity; and I hope posterity will be sufficiently just as to 
levy its severest condemnations upon those who alone are guilty, the 
European Spaniards. 

God keep you many years. 

Bolivar 


47. To [General Jean] Mari6n, Governor of the 
Department of Aux Cayes, Haiti 

[Copy] 

Canipano, June 27, 1816. 

General: 

I hasten to inform you that we have just received heavy rein- 
forcements of patriots from Guiria. Their valor and devotion assure 
me of an early conquest of the province of Cumana. 

The llaneros likewise support us, and we expect the arrival of 
several of their units within a few days. 

I have proclaimed the absolute emancipation of the slaves. The 
tyranny of the Spaniards has reduced them to such a state of stupidity 
and instilled in their souls such a great sense of terror that they have 
lost even the desire to be free!! Many of them have followed the 
Spaniards or have embarked on British vessels, [whose owners] have 
sold them in the neighboring colonies. Scarcely a hundred of them 
have volunteered, whereas the number of free men who have vol- 
untarily taken up arms is considerable. 

The Spaniards are marshalling their forces, and they are sparing 
no efforts to impede our operations; but our little army, fired with 
the spirit of liberty, will suffice to destroy them! 

I beg you, General, to be so good as to communicate this news to 
Colonel Paisson, as well as to your friend Mr. Doublas [sic]. 

Let me renew my assurances of sincere affection and regard, 
wherewith I have the honor to be, General, your very obedient 
servant, 


BolIvar 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


13 * 

48. To Colonel Carlos Soublette, Assistant Chief 
of the General Staff 

[Copy] 

General Headquarters, Ocumare, July 9, 1816, the 6th year. 

Nine o'clock in the morning. 

To date I have received only one message from you, dated on the 
7th from the mountain-top, but I know nothing of your operations 
all day yesterday. I must emphasize the necessity of frequent com- 
munications; without them we shall forever be in uncertainty and 
doubt, thereby causing embarrassment and delays in planning. For 
greater security, and to avoid the risk of any accident whatsoever, 
you will send your dispatches to me in duplicate, one by way of 
Choroni and the other by this route. 

Colonel Landaeta is marching to join your division. He will bring 
the few pickets of your battalions which remain here, in addition to 
the unassigned officers, the cavalry corps, and musket cartridges. 

It is vital that not a moment be lost in raising all the cavalry pos- 
sible, arming the greater part with firearms and the remainder with 
lances. 

We have news from Puerto Cabello which convinces us that the 
place is very poorly garrisoned and that the Spaniards themselves are 
the ones who most object to defending it. We are further informed 
of the evacuation of Valencia. 

The enemy detachment which occupied Choroni has withdrawn; 
the whole coast is already on our side, and men are being diligently 
recruited for the service. 

It will be impossible to transport all our arms and ammunition 
from here unless you send sixty to eighty mules fully harnessed and 
in charge of the necessary muleteers. This measure is extremely 
urgent. I commend it to your most careful attention. 

With the mules and drivers that I request, you must also send me 
a detachment of from 200 to 300 men, unarmed. 

The communications in duplicate which I again urge upon you 
should come, for greater security, by way of Cata and Periquito. I 
fear that you may have sent me messages by the present route which 
may have been intercepted. Salud . 


Bolivar 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


133 


49. To Colonel Carlos Soublette, Assistant Chief 
of the General Staff 

[Copy] 

General Headquarters, Ocumare, July 10, 1816. The 6th [year]. 

I have just received your letter of July 9, in which you inform me 
of your operations as far as Maracay and of your withdrawal to your 
present position. 

Prolonged reflection upon the situation of the enemy, his lack of 
soldiers, his timidity, and the desperate straits to which he is reduced, 
persuades me that your withdrawal has done us no end of harm 
and that the damage cannot be repaired except by very swift and 
audacious action. Only fifty of the more battered troops should be 
kept at La Cabrera, with the irregulars manning the fortifications, 
leaving Colonel Meza in command of that post, with orders from 
you to communicate with me daily, by way of the road from Mara- 
cay to Cata. In the direction of Choroni, Major Pinango is to set 
forth with 400 or 500 men from Maracay or Turmero; while I, with 
the respectable division which is left me and which will have been 
augmented by the recruits who are coming in from all sides, shall 
watch Puerto Cabello and Valencia and cover the rear from La 
Cabrera. Meanwhile, you will march swiftly in search of the enemy 
wherever he may be, and take all the Valles de Aragua as far as El 
Consejo, and farther if you see fit. Boldness must save us. Whatever 
you deem too daring will be your best course of action, for today 
rashness is prudence. 

I again charge you to send the pack-saddled mules and men to 
transfer arms and munitions to the Valles de Aragua, as I am other- 
wise ready to march to complete the assignment you are about to 
undertake. 

I know precisely how many troops the Spaniards have at Caracas, 
La Guaira, Puerto Cabello, and Valencia. These forces can be 
destroyed with those under your command. Salud y libertad. 

Bolivar 


134 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


50. To General J[uan] B[autista] Arismendi, Commander 
in Chief of the Island of Margarita 

[Mariano de Briceno, Historia de Margarita , p. 16, note] 

Giiiria, August 21, 1816. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

I have hitherto been unable to inform Your Excellency of the 
success of the Ocumare expedition, as various circumstances have 
prevented me from so doing. Even now I can do so only very briefly. 
It would require a volume to set forth the considerations that in- 
spired this expedition, and the unavoidable circumstances that led 
to its unhappy conclusion. 

Following the embarkation of the 600 men assembled at Caru- 
pano, our squadron set sail on July 2, and at midday on the 6th 
we occupied Ocumare without firing a shot. At nine in the evening, 
I placed the greater part of my forces under the command of Colonel 
Carlos Soublette with orders to march and take La Cabrera and 
fortify himself there, being assured that possession of this important 
military position would give him control of the Valles de Aragua, 
where he would infallibly raise an army, while I recruited in 
Ocumare as many men as were able to bear arms to guard the ord- 
nance to be unloaded by the squadron. The commander of the 
squadron was determined to leave on a cruise by the third day, 
which he did, in spite of my insistence that he should remain at 
that point as a matter of safety. I proclaimed the general emancipa- 
tion of the slaves, asked the free men to join us, commissioned Major 
Pinango to do the same in Choroni, and used every available device 
that might further my plan. 

Colonel Soublette, in a forced march, surprised and defeated a 
troop of Hussars of Ferdinand VII at La Cabrera, captured its com- 
mander, D. N. Eras [sic], and took most of its carbines and uniforms. 

A letter intercepted by Soublette, reporting the arrival of Morales 
at Valencia with an army of 7,000 men, caused that valiant officer, 
though he believed the number to be greatly exaggerated, to fear 
that he might be attacked and perhaps cut off by a superior force. He 
therefore retired the same day to the foot of the slope of Ocumare. 
The enemy marshalled his forces, numbering 600 men, and at- 
tacked him the following afternoon; and, although he had repulsed 
the attack, Soublette withdrew to the summit, as night was approach- 
ing and he might be cut off from the rear. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


135 

The unhappy news of Soublette s withdrawal led me to march on 
the 13th with the few recruits that I had raised in Ocumare, in 
order to incorporate them with the division and reattack the enemy. 
The same night I gave orders to occupy our defense positions at 
daybreak and to have the reinforcement of 150 men, which had ac- 
companied me from Ocumare, made part of the division. 

The enemy, who had remained at our front, with a force superior 
to ours and incomparably more experienced, took up positions in a 
ravine at the foot of our heights. Maintaining a lively fire for a 
space of two hours, he advanced through the crags in a most intrepid 
manner, evincing great confidence in his success, which he finally 
obtained. Unfortunately, the enemy’s left wing was opposite the 
new recruits on our right, who, however, held an impregnable posi- 
tion. I ordered my troops to advance to meet the enemy, but to in- 
experienced soldiers the difficulties seemed insurmountable, though 
in fact they were not, while the Spaniards bore themselves that day 
with truly heroic courage. I further ordered that the enemy s right 
flank be attacked, but, as we had no reserve body, we would have 
had to weaken our line, which surely would have been severed had 
we carried out this maneuver; hence the order was not put into 
effect. Finally, my right having been dislodged from the highest part 
of the field, the remainder of our line was compelled to abandon 
the open ground and retreated to the summit of the mountain. We 
lost 200 men, dead and wounded, and a portion of our troops was 
cut off in the retreat. 

In these unfortunate circumstances we had no choice but to march 
to the port of Ocumare, as we lacked provisions. We had exhausted 
the ammunition that we had brought with us, and our force was 
hampered by the transporting of the wounded and by the desertion 
of all the coastal inhabitants we had recruited, roughly 500 men. 

What action were we to take in this lamentable situation? A con- 
quering army was upon us; Puerto Cabello and La Guaira were 
capable of attacking us on either flank; and the Spanish squadron 
was prepared to disembark troops at will at any point along the 
coast. Thus, as our squadron was cruising at sea and as our arms 
and munitions depot might be captured by the enemy if left on 
shore, for our troops could not hold a place entirely without defense, 
it became necessary for us to find an immediate means of escape. 

I ordered the Commodore to transfer everything to the govern- 
ment-owned brig, Indio Libre, whereupon he remarked that he had 
no confidence in that vessel and that it would be better to load the 


136 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

arms and stores on two merchantmen then in port, which he did 
with a part of the ordnance. 

The night of the same day, the 14th, our troops received orders 
to march overland to Choroni, for our vessels, bound for that point, 
could carry only the women and children who were on board. That 
same night the brig and the transports set sail without awaiting my 
orders, and before Commodore Villaret could come ashore to re- 
ceive orders and report to me. At the moment, I foresaw a repetition 
of the Commander Bianchi affair at Cumand. 1 

In consequence, I resolved [to take ship] to save, if possible, our 
few military resources. During the night we remained before the 
port. The following day, the commander, by my orders, communi- 
cated to the merchant ships my decision to proceed to Choroni, 
whither my troops had already marched. We then set our course 
in that direction and began to draw away from the transports, which, 
instead of following us, set sail toward [the island of] Bonaire, situ- 
ated a short distance from the coast. Observing this, the commander 
followed in the wake of these vessels so essential to us, for they 
carried the last remnants of our military supplies. We fired upon 
them, but in vain, as they already had a long start. When we finally 
overhauled them it was very late. I then calculated that it would 
be better to follow our new course, because, with night approaching, 
the darkness would favor their escape, and they would be lost to us. 

The commander of our brig did his duty to perfection, but the 
captains of the transports did not. These feared to proceed to our 
ports, anticipating disasters and severe losses in their business ven- 
tures. Furthermore, they had been promised the fourth part of all 
the cargo on board in addition to certain sums which the government 
owed them. Everything conspired to alienate these traders from our 
country. So strong were Villarets suspicions of the commander of 
the brig that he had not permitted a single musket to be taken 
aboard, notwithstanding the fact that over a thousand had been 
abandoned on the beach, for he had reasoned that the value of our 
equipment would be a further inducement to the defection of the 
brig. These suspicions were the cause of my separation from the 
troops and from the coast. 

The following day, after we had arrived at Bonaire, Admiral 
Brions squadron appeared and obliged the merchantmen to return 

1 Bolivar makes reference to the departure of the Italian, Jos 6 Bianchi, com- 
mander of the naval squadron, from Cumand in August, 1814, taking with 
him the then available funds and a large portion of the military supplies (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


137 

the arms and stores of which they had intended to deprive us, partly 
in payment of their just claims and partly without any justification. 

I embarked the following morning for Choroni, which I found 
occupied by the enemy. I touched at Chuao, where I interrogated 
two spies who had just arrived from the Valles de Aragua. I learned 
from them that our troops, combined with 300 men from Choroni, 
were 600 strong, that they had taken Maracay by force of arms and, 
passing rapidly through the Valles de Aragua, had arrived at La Vic- 
toria, whence they were proceeding to the llanos. As I was alone, I 
returned to Bonaire and boarded the brig Indio Libre , which brought 
me here after thirty-two days at sea, having been obliged to seek 
water and provisions on the hostile coasts of the Antilles. 

From here I am planning to march toward Maturin with the 
armed forces and the stores in our possession. Probably we will de- 
part tomorrow, filled with seductive dreams, encouraged by the 
pleasant hope that we will surely find in the llanos an army com- 
posed of the divisions of Generals Piar, Monagas, Rojas, Sedeno, 
Zaraza, and MacGregor, who has lately been in command of the 
forces that I put ashore at Ocumare and who must have rejoined 
Zaraza and Monagas. When we have become masters of the llanos , 
we shall make contact with the 5,000 Granadans which General 
Valdes commands in Barinas. Our forces thus enlarged, we can 
move against Cumana and Guayana, and then, in succession, take 
the other provinces occupied by the Spaniards. 

Your Excellency may rest assured that all the young cattle 
[novillos] we can load in our merchantmen and fighting ships will 
be sent; but Your Excellency will do well to send as many ships as 
possible for this purpose. At the same time Your Excellency should 
send us all the arms that you do not absolutely require for the de- 
fense of the Island, for we need them badly, to place in the hands 
of men who wish to give themselves to the cause of liberty. 

Bolivar 









1817 


51. To Pedro Briceno Mendez, Secretary-General, 

AND TO THE BRAVEST OF THE BrAVE OF VENEZUELA 

[Copy] 

Barcelona, January 1, 1817. 

My dear comrades: 

With what joy did I learn of the deliverance of those so dear to 
me! What tender feelings were mine at the news that my brave, my 
faithful comrades-in-arms were safe! I hope never again in all my life 
to experience the despair and grief that I suffered while I was in 
doubt about your fate. Only the thought that my country might 
perish forever could equal my distress on your account; but, happily, 
valor and heroism have preserved for me persons so cherished. 

My happiness lacks only the pleasure of embracing you. I shall 
ever look forward to that memorable day; and especially so, if you 
add the titles of conquerors and liberators of Guayana to the many 
laurels that you have earned in the past. That sublime and weighty 
enterprise will bed the anchors of the Republic, should new tempests 
return to threaten her. You will fulfill the hopes of every citizen if 
you succeed in subduing that region which has done us so much 
harm but which can be so useful to us. When that is done, however, 
will you not return to break the shackles of our other brothers who 
are still suffering the enemy's tyranny? Yes, yes; you will fly with 
me even to rich Peru. Our destiny calls us to the ends of the Ameri- 
can world. For men of such valor, faith, and perseverance, nothing 
is impossible! Let the world behold us with admiration, no less for 
our disasters than for our heroism! Fortune cannot win over those 
whom death cannot intimidate. Life is only precious insofar as it is 
glorious. 

Good-bye, my beloved comrades. Accept the grateful homage of 
one who deems it an honor to call himself not the chief, but the 
brother, of the Bravest of the Brave of Venezuela. 

Salud , gloria y constancia . 


Bolivar 


140 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


52. To Pedro Briceno Mendez, Secretary-General 
[ Original ] 

San F61ix, June 19, 1817. 

My dear Briceno: 

I have received with much pleasure your kind letter of the 16th. 
But I assure you in all frankness that I never thought you were so 
timid as you appear from your letter. You ask me to spare you, if I 
can, the sacrifice of speaking to me with frankness. Surely it is not 
because you fear me, for you express your opinion freely enough: 
hence it must be some other fear that I cannot imagine. Come, dear 
Briceno, have more confidence in your position; do not despair for 
such a trifling reason. Doubtless you imagine that we are in a situa- 
tion similar to that of Cartagena, Giiiria, or Carupano, where cir- 
cumstances were against me, and where the spirit of dissension 
triumphed over justice and country. If I have been moderate out of 
prudence in the past, it has not been due to weakness. You must not 
believe that the intrigues are serious enough to destroy us. Never 
have I had a happier situation, no matter who says otherwise. The 
three thousand men who obey my voice will do what I command. 
They will defend the innocent, and they will brook no factions. 
Believe me, Briceno, you have nothing to fear; you are neither in 
Constantinople nor in Haiti. While I can breathe and hold sword 
in hand, there is no tyranny or anarchy here. If I have suffered cer- 
tain disorders, do not fear, for I shall correct them, and you may 
breathe and speak freely. Do your duty with firmness, and have no 
more fear of me than I have of my dear Briceno. Good-bye, my 
friend. 


BOLtVAR 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


141 


53. To Colonel Jos£ F£lix Blanco 
[ Original ] 

San Miguel, July 1, 1817. 

My dear friend: 

Last night I received various official letters from General Zaraza, 
dated the 21st at San Diego. He sends me very welcome news, which 
in brief is as follows: Major Hernandez, with a flying column, took 
eight prisoners in the neighborhood of El Chaparro and learned that 
the precise number of the troops brought there by Aldama, or rather 
of all the forces concentrated there, amounted to 1,250 men. The 
greater part of these departed for Barcelona; only a very small num- 
ber remained to fortify El Chaparro, so that it might serve as a base 
for forty cavalrymen of Torralva, who is procuring mounts for them 
all. The hussars and dragoons have dismounted and left; the former, 
for Calabozo, with their saddles on their backs; and the latter, for 
San Lorenzo. General Zaraza has received letters from the com- 
manders of Taguay and Camatagua, who, having set those towns 
and their environs in insurrection, have occupied Cura. Moreover, 
they have offered him their persons and their troops, assuring him 
that the entire department is disposed to shake off the Spanish 
yoke and that this disposition is general among the natives of those 
places. The commanders are Augustin Marrero and Jos6 Antonio 
Garcia, lieutenants of the said towns for the Spanish government. 
The same spirit is to be found in the Tuy and the Valles de Aragua, 
of whose uprising Zaraza is certain. Colonel Infante, with his flying 
column, has gone down as far as El Calvario. On his way he inter- 
cepted certain letters from the commanders of Chaguaramas and 
Orituco to the governor of Calabozo, in which they say that they 
are menaced from all sides by the insurgents, whose parties have 
multiplied and are an immediate threat to those towns as well as to 
Tucupido and La Pascua, and the commanders are all the more 
concerned because their weak garrisons, reduced to Indian arch- 
ers, are unable to withstand any attack. Other new guerrilla bands 
have been formed on the ranches of Belen, La Hogaza, and all 
through that region, where they harass the godos and hinder their 
rounding up of horses and cattle, thus reducing Orituco to dire 
straits. On the 7th of last month they received only a pound of meat 
per man, and the following day there was nothing. Infante also 
intercepted a letter from Morillo, addressed to the governor of Cala- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


142 

bozo and dated at Barcelona, June 1, in which he states that, as he 
must remain for some time in Cumand, he authorizes that any 
papers received for him, from Calzada or any other person, be opened 
by the governor, who will then forward them by way of Caracas, 
for transfer to Cumand by sea. You can judge what conditions in the 
llanos must be. He also tells the governor, in strictest confidence, 
that he intends to direct his operations against Margarita, leaving 
the Orinoco for the present because of the weather and the lack of 
horses and cattle. Please observe that we have discovered Morillos 
plan and his inability to attack us. We know, then, that the enemy 
have not a horse to call their own. Their hussars and dragoons are on 
foot, some making their way to Calabozo and some to San Lorenzo; 
and, above all, we know that public opinion in all the towns favors 
us and that the entire province of Caracas is in a state of insurrection. 
General Zaraza is of the opinion that the slightest effort will suffice 
to induce the people to embrace our cause and to enlist in our army 
in order to destroy the remnants of the godos. 

The rate of desertion is frightful: within two weeks, one hundred 
Indians in the Batallon de Honor alone have deserted, and the other 
battalions have lost in proportion. Spare no effort to collect possible 
recruits and send them here, but at the same time make some 
arrangements for sending additional replacements. Have all the lost 
or scattered horses and mules rounded up. Collect and send quanti- 
ties of provisions; arrange and put in order all the missions, as these 
are now our last labors. In short, my friend, work with your accus- 
tomed shrewdness and energy; and be assured of my friendship. 

BOLfVAR 


54. To Martin Tovar Ponte, Exiled Citizen of Caracas 
[Original] 

Guayana, August 6, 1817. 

My dear Martin: 

I have received your letter, dated in May, which was delayed en 
route. Accompanying it was a proclamation, which, though I con- 














SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


M3 

sider it very good, is not expedient. Respecting the proclamation, I 
will repeat to you what Socrates said to a friend who offered him a 
good defense, designed to save him from the persecution of his 
enemies. He replied, saying, it is excellent, but it does not suit me; 
for a shoe, however well made, will not fit every foot. The canon 1 
reestablished the government you desire, and its duration was that 
of cassava in hot broth. No one attacked it— he dissolved it of his 
own accord. In Margarita they ignored him; in Carupano they 
wanted to jail him; and on board ship they wished to throw the 
members of his government over a gun in order to apply the lash. 
The group has arrived here, but I have yet to see what they look 
like, for they have dispersed themselves, not from fear but from 
shame, lest the children hiss at them. I have restrained myself from 
writing or saying one word against that “federal government,” which, 
nevertheless, could not withstand the tide of opinion. Here, no one 
commands because he so desires, but because he is able. 

At last Guayana is free and independent. It is time, then, for you 
people to come here, to share our labors and also our glories, if we 
gain any, or at least to die in the country that gave us birth. Every- 
thing points to a favorable campaign, as the people are weary of the 
war and have joined us in spite of the vexations they suffer from 
either side, for it appears that the Spaniards have incurred much 
hatred, while we are preferred. This province is an excellent point 
of vantage. It is well situated for defense and even more so for of- 
fense. We threaten the enemy’s rear from here to Santa Fe, and we 
control an immense territory on either bank of the Orinoco, Apure, 
Meta, and Arauca rivers. We also have horses and cattle. Since the 
struggle is now a matter of holding territory and prolonging the cam- 
paign, whoever obtains the greater advantage will be the victor. 

I plan to march very soon to the opposite bank of the Orinoco to 
take advantage of the propitious opportunities opened to us by events 
on the plains of Caracas; for these are now controlled by Zaraza, and 
the Spanish guerrillas have joined him. I have but to reorganize this 
province and the army which is to follow me to Caracas. For this 
march, I shall have sufficient troops in a month, and in that period I 
shall have received all the stores that I need, in order to reserve some 
here and take the remainder with me. So I ask that you locate some 
merchants who will bring us gunpowder, shot, flints, rifles, and above 

1 Jose Cortes Madariaga, the so-called “canon of Chile,” Venezuelan patriot 
of 1811, who with others endeavored to set up a government at Cariaco inde- 
pendent of Bolivar (ed.). 


144 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


all fine powder. On arrival here, they will be paid most fairly and 
without delay. 

It is time for you to come here to see how our country welcomes 
back her scattered sons, and to observe that conditions are not the 
same as on the 19th of April. At that time law had some authority, 
but now force and cunning are in control, which is maintained with 
difficulty, for our guerrillas, being virtually independent, obey only 
the one who has a large army. 

I shall close, my dear Martin, for I have much to attend to at this 
moment and the messenger must leave immediately; but you may 
ever command your best friend, who longs to see you and embrace 
you. Likewise your dear family, for whom my aide-de-camp sighs 
like a good son and brother. He behaves very well; though he is as 
deaf as ever, he is better than ever, too. I give him excellent advice 
but little money, for poverty preserves virtue, which is the best 
wealth in the world. 

Good-bye again. Your affectionate 

SIMON 


55. To Fernando Penalver, Exiled Citizen 
in Port-of-Spain, Trinidad 

[Original] 

Guayana, August 6, 1817. 

My dear friend: 

I have duly received your two favors of June 23 and July 24, in 
which you restrict yourself almost exclusively to the contracts that 
may be made in order to provide us with arms and ammunition. 

Our occupation of Guayana and the Orinoco very greatly facilitates 
the operations of any merchants who may wish to supply us with 
these materials. They will be paid in cattle, mules, or the produce 
of the country. Navigation is swift and sure. There is nothing to 
fear from our enemies who are, for the moment, occupied on all 
sides, and who, much as they might wish, cannot readily dislodge 
our hold on the river, since our fleet is there. I trust that you will 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


145 


impress all these facts upon the foreign merchants and that, by ex- 
ploiting to the full the advantages we have just gained, you will be 
able to send us powder and shot in preference to anything else. 

These items need not be obtained solely in Trinidad. If we inform 
the other neighboring colonies of the liberation of this province and 
its principal cities, assuring them that we have the means of payment, 
many will prove willing to supply us with what we need. Work, dear 
friend, to inspire those people with confidence and to procure for us 
the only things that we lack in order to witness the freedom of our 
country. 

We have made much progress in the occupation of this province. 
We are masters of the Orinoco and may therefore undertake the 
Caracas campaign from any point we please. Furthermore, we have 
facilitated and completely reopened communication with the army 
of the Apure, which was formerly very difficult and, at this season, 
altogether impracticable. We possess horses and all else required 
to continue the war; we have two fortresses to protect our rear and 
our communications abroad; in short, the campaign is all but decided 
in our favor by virtue of this success, which would be sufficient to 
win over the towns beyond the Orinoco, had these not long been our 
supporters. 

We have found the strongholds well supplied with artillery and 
with a few stores of clothing. We have taken some stores of ammuni- 
tion, but they are very meagre. If, in addition to powder and shot, 
you can send us uniforms for our troops, a few guns, and other mili- 
tary equipment, it would be most desirable; for a large part of the 
army remains to be clothed, and we shall need quantities of arms 
when we get beyond the river, which I believe will not take long. 

At another time I shall have the pleasure of writing to you at 
greater length, but I am now very busy, and this courier must depart 
at once. 

Good-bye, my dear Penalver. You may command your affectionate 
and devoted friend, 

BOLlVAR 


I 46 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

56. To Colonel Antonio Jos£ de Sucre 

[La Voz del Patriotismo, Cumana, October 21, 1890] 1 

Angostura, October 7, 1817. 

My dear Sucre: 

Last night I received official letters from General Sedeno, enclos- 
ing another from General Guevara, and a letter from Montes. They 
manifest the greatest satisfaction at the success of Piar and offer to 
come with all their troops to Maturin to join Sedeno. One Balde- 
rrama, who delivered the papers to Cumanacoa, writes that all the 
officers and men are highly gratified and firmly attached to the gov- 
ernment. You must know by now that Carmona came over to us in 
Aragua, with 80 men under his command. Marino has not yet 
reached Maturin but is expected momentarily. He will be brought to 
me, either by persuasion or by force. In Maturin there is strong feel- 
ing in our favor, and the decisive moment has come for destroying 
the dissident faction there and for establishing our government in 
Cumand. With this in mind I have thought of sending you as chief 
of staff of the Cumand division, which will be commanded by Gen- 
eral Bermudez, who will accomplish the task of taking Cumana with 
great loyalty and skill. Until Bermudez arrives, and he should now 
be on his way to Maturin, I believe it is very important that you 
endeavor to influence those troops and make them see the desirability 
of unity and obedience to the government. I cannot tell you precisely 
what you should do, as I do not know exactly how matters will stand 
by the time you arrive in Maturin. But, in general, I will mention 
the following: 

First, if you see fit to march to Maturin to accomplish this mission, 
do so immediately; to this end I am sending you an order to the effect 
that General Urdaneta is to have Colonel Lara take over the Guayana 
command temporarily, until the arrival of your father, whom I intend 
to appoint to the post you now hold. If you do not believe this com- 
mission will be useful to the Republic, you are authorized to suspend 
it and to withhold the order mentioned above. 

Second, I am sending you the appointment as chief of staff of the 
Bermudez division, for you to make use of as you think best in the 

1 This letter (ami that of October 19, 1817, Doc. 57) was published by 
Jeronimo Ramos in the periodical cited, the official organ of the Sociedad 
Glorias a Sucre. The original is in the archives of General Jos6 Victorio 
Guevara (comp.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


147 

light of circumstances and events. If you prefer not to make use of 
this appointment until the arrival of Bermudez, you are authorized to 
act accordingly. 

Third, I am commissioning you to proceed to Maturin to treat 
with the commander of the troops there, explaining to him my in- 
tentions and my desire to protect the division and province of Cu- 
mand. In a word, this document is simply a credential to enable you 
to perform your mission without your having to intervene in any way, 
until the arrival of Bermudez, and to prepare the ground for obedi- 
ence to the government and for a favorable reception of Bermudez. 

Fourth, whether General Marino has adhered to the government 
voluntarily or only because circumstances did not permit any alterna- 
tive, you should attempt to complete his reconciliation with the gov- 
ernment. If a complete and absolute submission is not obtained, 
whether on the part of General Marino or of his troops, you will then 
consider yourself authorized to return to my General Headquarters to 
report on your mission. 

These are the confidential instructions I am giving you; they are 
to govern your conduct in all those cases that I have foreseen. Your 
brother Jerdnimo will remain in command of the Lower Orinoco bat- 
talion for many reasons; among others, the necessity of forming the 
battalion by any means whatsoever, and because the place must not 
remain ungarrisoned, whether it is you or your father who defends 
it. 

Good-bye, my dear Sucre. You may command your affectionate 
and devoted friend, 

BOLIVAR 


57. To Colonel Antonio Jos£ de Sucre 
[La Voz del Patriotismo, Cumana, October 21, 1890] 

Angostura, October 19, 1817. 

My dear Sucre: 

I have received the letter you wrote me before you started for Ma- 
turin, and I have read it with great pleasure, for it contains ideas and 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


148 

sentiments which I highly approve. I shall never forget the promises 
you give me, and still less your desire to accompany me to the west. 
I promise you that when Cumand is freed of its factions and its ene- 
mies I shall call you to my side, not as a favor but as a necessity; or, 
rather, to satisfy my heart, which loves you and knows your worth. 

Five or six days ago General Bermudez left San Diego for Maturin, 
and I suppose he has by now arrived or will very shortly. The bearer 
of this letter carries important papers for him, containing instructions 
in conformity with the circumstances and concerning future develop- 
ments. If General Bermudez is not in Maturin, you will keep the 
papers and give them to him upon his arrival. Assist the General, my 
friend, with all your physical and moral powers. He is sorely in need 
of capable support to achieve the pacification and ultimate liberation 
of Cumand. The task is an arduous one, and, therefore, the more 
honorable for those who perform it. 

General Sedeno has taken the most opportune measures to advance 
the work that you and Bermudez are about to complete. I feel that 
much has been done, as we have already broken up the small faction 
at Cumanacoa. Now that Carmona is involved, he must accomplish 
more in his region, where, at best, only two or three can be enemies 
of the government, while the rest are either loyal or indifferent. 

Politics rather than force must be used in that province. Hence, I 
earnesdy charge you to move all the springs of the human heart to 
obtain support of the government on the part of those dissidents 
whom General Marino has led astray. You must have no enemies 
other than the infamous, such as I have, and have always had. Who 
can regard enemies as brothers? Of one thing I am certain: General 
Bermudez and yourself will do great things in Cumand, and you will 
some day, perhaps, be called the saviors of your country. This bright 
hope must enable you to endure every sacrifice. 

Your father has not as yet arrived; but I await him, for I am anxious 
to place him in command of Guayana. I have ordered that its garrison 
be augmented, and the battalion will by now be considerably en- 
larged under your brother Jerdnimo, who is in command there tem- 
porarily. 

General Zaraza’s troops have occupied El Sombrero, and yesterday 
General Torres left here with 600 well-armed infantrymen to aug- 
ment Zaraza s division. Within two weeks everything will be ready 
for the march to San Fernando if we receive the arms and equipment 
we are expecting at any moment. Forty ships of war and 1,500 men 
are prepared to advance. Seven thousand men will invade the plains 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


I49 

of Calabozo under the orders of Generals Urdaneta, Zaraza, Pdez, 
and Anzoategui. I believe that with these forces we shall enter Cara- 
cas and liberate Venezuela, whereupon Barcelona and Cumand will 
be immediately evacuated in consequence of the fall of Caracas, and 
the west will offer but little opposition to our arms. 

Good-bye, my dear Colonel; you may command your affectionate 
friend, 

BOLlVAR 


58. To General Jos£ Tadeo Monagas 
[Letterbook] 

Angostura, December 19, 1817. 

The importance and urgency of the rigorous enforcement of mar- 
tial law and the exact observance of the orders issued to you on the 
15th and 17th of this month increase with each passing moment. The 
Republic in her imminent peril can only save herself by the unfailing 
zeal, valor, energy, and activity of her favorite sons— the generals and 
leaders who have been entrusted with her defense and honor. The 
incident of La Hogaza and the danger to be encountered by General 
P&ez, if he conducts himself as did General Zaraza, 1 oblige us to be 
cautious and to prepare ourselves to snatch from the enemy’s hands 
a victory which he won there only by chance. 

The news concerning the army of the Apure, which I received 
yesterday from an officer who had just arrived from there, obliges me 
to redouble my efforts to reunite and organize a great army, which 
should be, of itself, capable of repairing the great losses and misfor- 
tunes that we have suffered. This news is: that Morillo, with an 
army of 3,000 men, occupied, on the 3d of this month, Apurito, lo- 
cated upon the banks of the river of that name; General Pdez with 
more than 2,000 men was then six leagues distant on the banks of 
the Matiyure at La Concepcidn. At the time of the departure of this 
officer our advance guard had twice engaged that of the enemy in 

1 Zaraza, despite superior forces, had been defeated by the disciplined troops 
of General La Torre. Bolivar had ordered Zaraza not to engage in combat (ed.). 


150 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


skirmishes; and each army was only awaiting the arrival of reinforce- 
ments before engaging the other. 

According to this report, if we rely upon the valor and good for- 
tune of the army of Apure and its general [P4ez], we should have 
little to fear; but, as the fortunes of war vary, as Morillos reinforce- 
ments may arrive before those of General Pdez, and, finally, as the 
division of La Torre may now be bound there, it is imperative that 
we prepare ourselves either to support Paez with all speed, if re- 
quired, or to meet the enemy, who will be upon us immediately 
should he succeed in destroying or scattering our forces in that area. 

The necessity, therefore, of raising as many troops as possible, of 
recruiting unremittingly to the last man, of concerning ourselves seri- 
ously with the development of discipline in the corps already formed, 
of preventing desertion and punishing offenders severely, and of in- 
spiring the soldiers with confidence and courage is today more urgent 
than ever. 

The army that I propose to raise will exceed 6,000 men, and it may 
reach 8,000, if each general contributes the number that he has of- 
fered; if each does his duty, he should exceed this number. These 
forces will be more than sufficient to destroy any army Morillo may 
have; but it is indispensable that we keep our forces together, and 
that we take every means to insure the mobility of this huge body. 
I therefore commend vigilance, and I urge you to be wary of the 
enemy and to avoid clashes that might compromise us, and I again 
recommend that all horses, mares, and mules that may be of service 
to us be kept in a place of safety and good pasture where they will 
come to no harm and be ready against the day of need. 

My departure is detained only by General Bermudez, for the muni- 
tions and arms I was expecting are now about to arrive in a brig 
coming up the river. With these I shall arm and provision your bri- 
gade, although I do not know how many rifles the ship is bringing. 

The fact that La Torre has been wounded, which now appears 
certain, is one more reason for us to redouble our vigilance; not for 
a moment must we lose sight of the enemy's movements. His second 
in command, Lopez, who has undoubtedly taken charge, is fearless 
and enterprising, knows the terrain thoroughly, and enjoys a certain 
following. It may be anticipated that he will possibly attempt some 
bold sallies and surprises. You, therefore, must commend vigilance 
and every possible precaution to all of the officers that you commis- 
sion, severely and unfailingly reprimanding the slightest omission in 
this respect. 

God keep you many years. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


151 

59. To Lieutenant Colonel Juan Jos£ Rond6n 
[ Letterbook ] 

Angostura, December 28, 1817. 

Not content with the issuance of your Lieutenant Colonels com- 
mission in token of the consideration you have earned by your recent 
conduct, I take this opportunity to thank you in the name of your 
country, which finds in you a zealous and faithful son and brave 
defender. 

The operations which were suspended during the reorganization 
of the grand army are about to recommence. Tomorrow, I shall 
march from here with more than 4,000 men who are to join forces 
with General Zarazas brigade. I am accordingly notifying the Gen- 
eral to march with all his forces to the port of Cabruta, which is the 
place that I have selected for the reunion. The 12th of the coming 
month is the date set when he is to be there with all the horses and 
transports he may have. I expect that you, on your part, will con- 
tribute in every way to the proper execution of this order, upon 
which depends in large measure the salvation of the Republic. 

God keep you many years. 








1818 


60. To Luis Bri6n, Admiral of the Venezuelan Navy 
[Original] 

San Fernando, May 15, 1818. 

My dear Admiral: 

At various times I have received many letters from you which I 
have not had time to answer, for I have been occupied with maneu- 
vers and campaigns. These activities have scarcely permitted me time 
to answer even briefly the correspondence which comes to me from 
all parts, and which has increased in a thousand ways, above all in 
the War Department. 

I now avail myself of a spare moment to relate to you in passing 
certain matters of importance. This campaign is all but decided in 
our favor, as we have destroyed some five or six thousand Spanish 
troops, for the greater part Europeans. We have fought seven actions, 
five of them very bloody, in which the enemy's losses were much the 
greater. The Spanish regiments have been reduced to bare skeletons, 
where they have not been altogether annihilated. I estimate that there 
are now [torn] [four or five] thousand Spaniards in Venezuela, and 
that they have about an equal number of creoles in their service. 
They have neither horses nor cavalry, but their infantry is excellent. 
In the mountains about Caracas it holds out against our cavalry, 
while we have, at present, no more than five hundred infantry; for 
that branch has suffered losses in every engagement we have sus- 
tained, whether we were victorious or defeated. The Spaniards cannot 
campaign in the llanos without risk of returning as they have done on 
three previous occasions, very much battered, and with their forces 
reduced by half. But, at the same time, we cannot enter Caracas un- 
less we greatly increase the number of our infantry. In this we shall 
not succeed until we receive arms and ammunition. Thus far we 
have been cut off from all aid; yet we have fought many actions, in 
every one of which we have lost arms and ammunition, as generally 
follows in war. Furthermore, we have suffered other losses which, by 
all the rules of probability, we had no reason to expect. Fortune has 
conspired against us, but it has favored our enemies, else all Vene- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


154 

zuela would have been in our power last February. What has con- 
tributed most to the prolonging of this campaign has been the stub- 
born resistance of San Fernando and the determination of General 
Pdez to take that town, which, at least, should have yielded to the 
light blockade established there since my arrival here. There have 
been no lack of others who, with their erroneous opinions, have con- 
tributed to our poor success. The action of February 12 delivered 
Venezuela and the Spanish army into our hands, but we failed to 
profit from the good fortune lavished upon us. 1 The Spaniards blun- 
dered in their every move. They should have been destroyed a thou- 
sand times over; yet, though they have lost more troops, their 
discipline enables them to dispute control of the country. 

The latest bulletin on the action at Cojedes will give you an idea 
of our recent operations. Nothing in it is exaggerated; you may rely 
upon its contents in all particulars. General Monagas is proceeding 
with this army to Barcelona to continue his operations against that 
place, which can easily be taken; and General Zaraza is operating 
anew in the eastern section of the llanos of Caracas. General Sedeno 
is covering the llanos of Calabozo, and General P&ez is remounting 
his cavalry to recommence operations against Caracas. I have come 
here to meet the British troops, which should have arrived by now, 
and certain auxiliaries who were coming from Guayana, but I am 
still awaiting them. Furthermore, I have been unable to mount a 
horse, as some boils broke out on my thighs. I am now well and shall 
delay no longer; in fact, I mean to leave for Calabozo within three 
days. 

On the plains of the province of Caracas we found only mules, 
which we rounded up, sent on, and will continue to send. A greater 
variety of supplies can be obtained from the province of Barinas, and 
orders to this effect have been issued. We shall soon receive quantities 
of tobacco, indigo, cotton, cacao, and hides. Their shipment has been 
delayed for lack of bottoms, which we need in quantity. In spite of 
this, proper measures have been taken to avoid further delay, and all 
will go forward post-haste to Guayana. 

I trust you are bringing us many good things, among others the 
British regiments and the military supplies. I have fixed my hopes 
upon the services you are undertaking for us in bringing to Guayana 
the resources we require. You are, as always, the instrument of our 

1 The Liberator alludes to the opposition he encountered from one of his 
strongest lieutenants in El Guarico, preventing him from continuing the of- 
fensive at the critical moment of the campaign Ced.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 1 55 

salvation. So do not forget that this must be your lot and that you 
may always command your affectionate and devoted friend, 

BOLIVAR 


61. To Luis L6pez Mendez, Venezuelan 
Charg£ d’affaires, London 

[La America llustrada y Pintoresca, Caracas, January 1, 1889] 1 

Angostura, June 12, 1818. 

I have received your communications of December 31 and January 
19, by the brig Hunter; with whose supercargoes, Messrs. Hamilton 
and Princeps, the government has contracted for its entire cargo, the 
said gentlemen being well satisfied with the prices and terms stipu- 
lated. I should have liked the Hunter to return immediately with a 
cargo of produce of the country, but transportation difficulties have 
prevented this being done as quickly as I might have wished. Ap- 
prised of this circumstance, the supercargoes have gladly agreed to 
wait until the end of next month. The insidious rumors which the 
Spaniards spread against us in the Antilles detained this vessel there 
far too long; and of the four others you have dispatched, none has 
reached our ports. Thus, for want of their cargo of arms and muni- 
tions at the most critical and decisive moments, I am denied the 
satisfaction of writing you from Caracas that not one Spaniard re- 
mains in our territory. The few Spaniards who survive owe their pre- 
carious existence exclusively to this lack of arms. They have outlived 
their most distinguished leaders, the flower of their officers’ corps, 
and evert Morillo himself, who is said to have died of the serious 
wound he received in the bloody batde of El Semen. Unfortunately, 
in these circumstances, the only ship that has reached this port left 
all the armament she had on board in the Antilles, and Mr. Princeps 
has been obliged to go there to obtain it. 

1 The original is in the possession of the L6pez Mendez family, Caracas. In 
the letterbook of the Secretariat, Archivo del Libertador, the first part only is 
found, with the following lines marked out: “units like those brought over by 
Colonels Wilson and Hippisley are more a burden than a help" (comp.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


156 

You may judge with what impatience and anxiety I am await- 
ing these materials, without which I cannot undertake any large op- 
eration; for lack of them I have not obtained the advantages that 
should have been earned by our many efforts and sacrifices. Nor do I 
omit from my calculations your announcement that the enemy may 
have received reinforcements from the Hispano-Russian expedition. 
I would willingly have exchanged the entire cargo of the brig Hunter 
for only the arms that she left behind. Arms have been my constant 
concern and the principal object of my correspondence with you, but 
unhappily also the least successful. The lack of any other resource 
might be remedied, or at least tolerated; but without an ample sup- 
ply of guns and powder, great progress is not to be thought of. Con- 
centrate, therefore, all your attention upon this objective, and if the 
two hundred thousand pounds sterling of the loan announced by Mr. 
Walton for the purchase of five ships of the line has not yet been 
spent, then hasten to send us a complete armament, with every type 
of equipment and munition of war. These will be of infinitely greater 
service to us than ships. The cavalry can be armed in this country, 
for they need nothing from abroad except uniforms. Thus, the cargo 
brought by the brig Sarah is totally useless. The llaneros, that is, 
those who make up our cavalry have neither use for, nor need of, 
foreign saddles. Sabers, the only article they can use, have not ar- 
rived, nor have any of the other weapons absolutely needed by our 
infantry, which must be procured entirely from abroad. 

Next to arms, ammunition, and clothing, we could make excellent 
use of a few good officers, corporals, and sergeants from among the 
Spaniards who, sympathetic to our cause, reside in England and 
France because they prefer banishment to slavery. They would be 
infinitely more useful than foreigners who, ignorant of the language, 
require a great deal of time to learn it, meanwhile being of little serv- 
ice. This objection would not apply in the case of complete and or- 
ganized units, which could begin operations on the day of their ar- 
rival. But individual officers speaking a different language, or small 
units such as have arrived to date are more burdensome than helpful. 
I repeat, therefore, that if foreigners come they should preferably be 
in battalions of more than, say, three to four hundred men, equipped 
and armed. 

The arrival of General Renovales and a number of Spanish officers 
would produce a great effect on public opinion in Spain. Endeavor to 
contact the General and forward to him the enclosed letter, after you 
have read it. You may assure him that the government will scrupu- 
lously perform such promises as you and he may make to officers tak- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


157 

ing service in our army. For the most part, infantrymen, preferably 
subalterns, should be enlisted. Some good artillerymen, both officers 
and men, would also be very useful to us. Assure them that the gov- 
ernment will not limit itself to the remuneration designated in the 
law of October 10, respecting the allocation of national property, but 
that, in addition, during better circumstances they will be well paid 
according to their services. Make every effort to send a considerable 
body at one time and as quickly as possible, for small units are of lit- 
tle help. In recruiting Spanish officers, thereby drawing resources 
from Spain herself, it would be of great aid to proclaim openly the 
principle which must be the basic aim of our policy: “Peace with the 
Spanish nation, and relentless war upon her present government.” 
To further this important enterprise, which should be introduced 
into the Peninsula by every possible means, some pamphlets should 
be prepared. Nothing should be overlooked in order to separate the 
interests of the Spanish nation from those of her government, and to 
convince the Spanish people that their real interest lies in a close al- 
liance with an independent America. 

If the two hundred thousand pounds sterling of which Mr. Walton 
speaks are already invested in the ships, see to it that these vessels 
come well-provisioned and well-manned by British sailors, and also 
with some money for necessary expenses upon arrival in America. 
Warn all vessels bound for our ports that if they carry tioops or war 
materials they may face detention and even confiscation in the An- 
tilles, so that they may be informed of the necessity for taking pre- 
cautions before sailing from London and hence not enter the island 
ports, but, instead, put out a boat to pick up information and any 
needed supplies. 

Whether or not the aforementioned loan expected by Mr. Walton 
for the purchase of the ships has been arranged, you should exert every 
effort and leave no stone unturned to negotiate a credit of at least 
one million 'pesos fuertes for immediate purchase and shipment of the 
arms, ammunition, and the other war materiel I have mentioned. You 
will stipulate prices, terms (never less than one year or more) and 
conditions to the merchant interested. You will make it clear that the 
government of Venezuela will not only exactly and scrupulously 
comply with whatever contracts you make in its name, but that 
Venezuela possesses enormous resources and the choicest articles of 
commerce to satisfy whatever advances are made to her for the re- 
covery of her liberty. A million pesos , applied in the manner which I 
have suggested to you, will unfailingly enable us to take possession of 
all the territory of the Republic; this will place us in a position to 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


I 5 8 

meet the debts that we contract. You must grant any guarantees re- 
quired for this loan; you may even, in the name of the government, 
grant exclusive concessions in commodities gready in demand, for a 
specified quantity and period of time. 

From either the two hundred thousand pounds mentioned by Mr. 
Walton or from the credit you negotiate, you will give Mr. Walton 
three hundred pounds sterling; for yourself, take enough to repay 
the four thousand pounds you have invested in the outfitting of 
officers and ships, and for your most pressing expenses. 

I greatly regret that my repeated communications addressed to you 
from this city have gone astray or been lost. To avoid this in the fu- 
ture, I shall address you through Mr. Guillermo White of the island 
of Trinidad, in whose care my letters will reach you with greater 
safety; and I beg you to write me also in his care. 

Endeavor to deliver the accompanying papers in person to the 
envoy from Buenos Aires, conveying the sentiments of friendship 
and brotherhood that bind the government and citizens of this Re- 
public to that which he has the well-deserved honor to represent, 
and assuring him of the esteem in which I hold him personally. 

God keep you many years. 

Bolivar 

Pedro Briceno Mendez 

Secretary of State and Foreign Relations 


62. Proclamation to the People of the Rio de la Plata 
[Correo del Orinoco, June 27, 1818] 

General Headquarters, Angostura, June 12, 1818. The 8th [year]. 

SIMON BOLIVAR, Supreme Head of the Republic 
of Venezuela, etc. 

Your Venezuelan brothers have joined you in the glorious march 
which, since April 19, 1 8 1 0, 1 has restored to America the political 

1 The date on which Venezuela established a government independent of 
that in Spain, but owing allegiance to the Spanish king. On July 5, 1811, it 
declared its complete independence (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


159 

existence denied her by the tyrants of Spain. Venezuela has wit- 
nessed with joy and admiration your wise reforms, your military 
glory, and your public welfare. If she cannot claim a success equal 
to yours, she can assert the same principles and purposes. In all things 
we have been alike; but ill-fortune has plagued Venezuela. Twice has 
she succumbed to it, and her third effort is even now contested with 
a cruelty no history but our own can match. Eight years of struggle, 
sacrifice, and ruin have given our country the right to liken herself 
to yours, so infinitely more splendid and more favored. 

The wisdom of the government of the Rio de la Plata in all her 
administrative departments, her political relations with foreign coun- 
tries, and the power of her arms in the heart of Peru and the terri- 
tories of Chile, all are eloquent examples that shall persuade the peo- 
ples of America to follow the noble paths of freedom and honor. 
Though from afar, Venezuela will mark and note your achievements. 

People of the Rio de la Plata! The Republic of Venezuela, al- 
though steeped in misery, offers you brotherhood; and when, covered 
with laurels, she has wiped out the last tyrants that yet profane her 
soil, she will invite you to join one single society, that our motto may 
be: Unity of South America. 

Sim6n Bolivar 


63. To Juan Martin Pueyrred6n, Supreme Director 
of the United Provinces of the Rio de la Plata 

[Correo del Orinoco, June 27, 1818] 

Angostura, June 12, 1818. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

I have the honor to reply to the communication which Your Ex- 
cellency had the honor to send me under date of November 19, 1816. 
Its long-delayed arrival, although easily understood, has not dimin- 
ished the inexpressible joy in my heart on witnessing the inaugura- 
tion of the relations we have so long desired. Your Excellency, over- 
coming the barriers presented by distance, isolation, and lack of 
direct routes, has taken a forward step that gives both governments 
new life by making them better known to each other. 


l6o SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

Your Excellency honors my country by regarding her as a solitary 
monument which will remind America of the price of liberty and 
which will recall the memory of a magnanimous and incorruptible 
people. There is no doubt but that Venezuela, in devoting everything 
to the sacred cause of freedom, regards her sacrifices as triumphs. 
Upon the altars of patriotism she has offered her blood in torrents, 
her towns in flames, to the absolute ruin of all her works of man and 
even of Nature. 

Nothing can match the kindness of Your Excellency's undeserved 
eulogies to myself. I have scarcely been able, with faltering footsteps, 
to travel the great road which my country has marked out for me. I 
have been nothing more than an instrument activated by the great 
movement set in motion by my fellow-citizens. I return our most sin- 
cere thanks for the honor shown my country and myself by Your 
Excellency and the free people of South America: a people who are 
the glory of the hemisphere of Columbus, that tomb of tyrants and 
conquerors, and the bulwark of American independence. Accept, 
Your Excellency, the tribute of admiration that I hasten to offer to 
the civic virtues, political wisdom, and military prowess of the peo- 
ple of Buenos Aires and their illustrious Director. 

The proclamation that Your Excellency has deigned to address to 
us is a brilliant testimonial of the fraternal sentiments and high gen- 
erosity of our brothers in the south. It is with the greatest satisfaction 
that I deliver to Your Excellency the cordial reply my fellow-citizens 
have desired me to transmit to the sons of the Rio de la Plata. In it 
they may read for themselves the sentiments of tender solicitude that 
all Venezuelans feel for their honored compatriots of the south. 

Your Excellency may assure your noble countrymen that they will 
be received and honored here, not merely as members of a friendly 
republic, but as members of our Venezuelan commonwealth. There 
should be but one country for all Americans, since we have been per- 
fectly united in every other way. 

Most Excellent Sir, when the triumph of Venezuela's arms has 
completed the work of independence, or when more favorable cir- 
cumstances permit us more frequent communication and closer rela- 
tions, we, for our part, will hasten, with lively interest, to establish 
the American pact; which, in forming a body politic comprising all 
our republics, shall present America to the world in an aspect of 
majesty and grandeur, greater than any that history has recorded. An 
America thus united— should Heaven grant us that devout wish— 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


161 


could truly style herself the Queen of Nations and the Mother of 
Republics. 

I hope that the Rio de la Plata, with her powerful influence, will 
cooperate actively in perfecting the political edifice which we initi- 
ated on the first day of our struggle for freedom [regeneration], 

God keep Your Excellency many years. Most Excellent Sir! 

Bolivar 

Pedro B. Mendez, Secretary 


64. To [Jos£] Leandro Palacios 
[Original] 

Angostura, July 11, 1818. 

My dear Leandro: 

I have the pleasure of informing you that I am momentarily ex- 
pecting the arrival of a [North] American envoy, commissioned by 
his government to confer with ours respecting the matter of recogni- 
tion and even of war against Spain. 1 Admiral Bri6n assures me of 
this, as he refers to the American envoy who accompanies him. I am 
happy to say also that we have received an enormous quantity of 
arms and equipment brought by the Admiral. This equipment will 
enable us to put a formidable army into the field, since it is because 
of lack of arms that we have not liberated Venezuela in this cam- 
paign. What can we do with but fifteen hundred riflemen, when we 
could not even replace our losses? 

The entire territory is ours except for the mountains of Caracas, 
and our cavalry has grown prodigiously on the llanos . The enemy 
cannot move for lack of horses, and it is only with great difficulty 
that he finds enough livestock in order to live. Our situation is ad- 
mirable, we fear nothing, and next month I shall recommence opera- 
tions with a force double its former strength. 

One other thing: It is said here that the women of the Machado 


1 Probably Baptiste Irvine, who served as a special agent only (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


162 

family have left for Caracas; if this is so, there is no more to be said; 
but if not, I have an errand for you. Jose Mdndez Monsanto has or- 
ders to deliver to Pepita four hundred duros for the ladies to make 
the voyage here, and I shall also pay their expenses on the vessel 
which is to bring them. I am doing this because it is claimed that 
poverty drives the refugees to Caracas, while here they can live bet- 
ter than on the ranches. Urge this family to come, and tell Pepita that 
unless she wants me to forget her she must come here. Moreover, a 
million incredible rumors are circulating hereabouts, and I find my- 
self in a state of most distressing uncertainty. Tell me, in short, what 
you can of these ladies, so that I may reach a decision and know what 
to think and do. 

Poor Silvestre was an excellent officer and died with great honor. 
The entire army mourns him as he deserves. His loss is one of the 
greatest casualties we have suffered in this campaign; but the enemy 
has paid dearly for it, for we have destroyed nearly all the troops from 
Spain and more than five thousand creoles whom Morillo brought 
from New Granada. The godos are left as masters of the field, but 
they have no force to occupy it, while we have expanded our territory 
and our forces. 

Good-bye, dear Leandro. You may command your affectionate 
friend, 

BOLIVAR 


65. To Jos£ Leandro Palacios 
[Copy] 

Angostura, August 7, 1818. 

My dear Jose Leandro: 

Though I have had no letters from you for some time, I have not 
forgotten you, and I am writing to inform you of our successes and 
prospects. I assume that you are still interested in the country’s cause, 
that you rejoice at its gains, and that you are doing everything possi- 
ble to promote a public opinion in its favor. Because of your efforts, 
I am sending you news that may help you to correct the stories of the 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


i 6 3 

Spaniards and of those infamous creoles who delight in discrediting 
their country and serving the King of Spain. Fortunately, only rogues 
have embraced that party, thus serving us by purging the Republic 
of their vices. 

You must already know, from the bulletins of the Army of Lib- 
eration, of the many events of the last campaign. Our success has 
varied, but, in the final reckoning, our victories have given us pos- 
session of all the llanos and the Spanish-occupied portion of the 
province of Barinas. Paramount among our victories has been the 
destruction of the Spanish army, which has been reduced to nothing. 
These successes are too considerable to have been won without sacri- 
fice. The eight or ten battles which we fought from February to May 
cost us the greater part of our infantry, but this loss purchased for us 
the destruction of all the Spanish cavalry and nearly all their in- 
fantry. Our cavalry remains intact, and it occupies the territory we 
have liberated. Our remaining infantry has withdrawn to be re- 
formed during the winter in preparation for effective action on the 
coast and in the mountains, where the enemy has quartered himself. 
This is the most precise account that can be given of this campaign. 

Compare our bulletins with the exaggerated accounts in the Cara- 
cas newspapers, and you will be the more convinced of their truth. 
The reorganization of our battalions was carried out early in June; 
they are now stronger than before the campaign opened. The enthu- 
siasm with which the men come forward to enlist is indescribable. 

The early termination of our struggle which these men envisage 
seems to inspire them to make this new effort with greater eagerness 
than ever before. We have twice the number of infantry than when I 
marched upon Calabozo. In Apure there are more than 1,000 in- 
fantry, and General Monagas at Barcelona has an equal number. In 
this province, I have over 2,000 and Marino has offered me as many 
more; not to mention the division which Bermudez has taken to at- 
tack the coasts of Giiiria, and which should swell to at least 1,500 
men. Five hundred rifles have been sent to Zaraza to arm a like num- 
ber of infantrymen that he has united. Lack of arms and ammunition 
—the principal cause which obliged us to suspend operations— will 
trouble us no longer. We have received ten thousand muskets, and 
we expect an equal number which have been contracted for. We now 
lack nothing to recommence operations, and I am only waiting for the 
winter rains to abate slightly, as these have been extremely heavy this 
year. 

Very soon the Grand Army will be in the field; meantime such di- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


164 

visions as are ready are now in action, and with excellent success. 
Zaraza has beaten two flying columns which had set out from Orituco 
to obtain livestock on the llanos. Pdez occupies the plains of Cala- 
bozo and all the province of Barinas, where the Spaniards have not a 
single company to oppose him. Barcelona is quiet, and Monagas, who 
holds it, has no enemy to fear. The Spaniards hold only the capital, 
which we have not taken simply because I do not think that now is 
the time for it The interior of Cumand is in Marino’s power. He has 
given up his former pretensions and is today among those most obedi- 
ent to the government. Bermudez has marched upon Giiiria, and very 
shortly will be master of the whole coast, where he is generally be- 
loved. 

In brief, our situation is most encouraging. The enemy, decimated 
as he is, cannot take the offensive against us as he must resist attack 
upon all his positions. What a pity that, in these circumstances, those 
who bore every misery for four years should now flee and abandon 
the cause of their country! Can it be that they prefer to go and serve 
the enemy when their country needs them? If only those worthless 
citizens of Merida and their like had gone, I would not regret it; but 
I do pity the lot of the unfortunates who, through weakness, have 
compromised themselves. It is necessary, therefore, that you make 
every effort to stem such scandalous and shameful desertion, and 
have these refugees come either to Margarita or to this capital. You 
lead the way, for you must set the example, and place yourself at 
the head of the expedition to be formed. 

What do they fear? Believe me, there is no peril but that which we 
may bring upon ourselves; and even that is fictitious and unreal. 

Good-bye, dear Leandro, you may command your affectionate and 
devoted friend, 


Bolivar 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


165 


66. Proclamation to the People of New Granada 

[Correo del Orinoco , August 22, 1818] 

Angostura, August 15, 1818. The 8th [year]. 

SIMON BOLIVAR, Supreme Head of the Republic of Venezuela 
and Commander in Chief of her Armies and those of New 
Granada, etc. 

Granadans: 

The army of Morillo is no more: new expeditions came to rein- 
force him, but they, too, have ceased to exist. The blood of more than 
20,000 Spaniards has drenched the soil of Venezuela. Hundreds of 
glorious battles fought by the armies of liberation have proved to 
Spain that the avengers of America are as just as its defenders are 
noble. An awe-struck world beholds with joy the miracles worked 
by freedom and valor against tyranny and violence. The Spanish 
Empire has pitted its enormous resources against handfuls of men 
who, though unarmed and barely clothed, were inspired by freedom. 
Heaven has rewarded our sacrifices: Heaven has applauded our jus- 
tice: Heaven, the protector of liberty, has granted our prayers and has 
sent us arms to defend humanity, innocence, and virtue. Generous, 
war-hardened foreigners have come to place themselves under the 
standards of Venezuela. Can the tyrants, then, continue the struggle, 
when our resistance, which has reduced their strength, has aug- 
mented ours? 

Spain, plagued by Ferdinand and his murderous rule, approaches 
her end— her commerce annihilated by swarms of our privateers; her 
fields deserted, for death has cut off her sons; her wealth depleted 
by twenty years of war; the spirit of the nation broken by imposts, 
levies, inquisition, and despotism. The most frightful catastrophe is 
about to overtake Spain. 

Granadans! America’s day has come; no human power can stay 
the course of Nature guided by the hand of Providence. Join your 
efforts to those of your brothers: Venezuela marches with me to free 
you, as in past years you marched with me to free Venezuela. Al- 
ready our advance guard fills whole provinces of your territory with 
the lustre of its arms; and that same advance guard, powerfully 
aided, will hurl the destroyers of New Granada into the seas. The 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


1 66 

sun will not have completed the course of its present round without 
beholding in all your territory the proud altars of liberty. 

Bolivar 

Pedro B. Mendez 
Secretary of State 


67. To General Jos& Antonio Paez 
[ Letterbook ] 

Angostura, September 29, 1818. 

My dear General: 

I have had the sincere pleasure of receiving your letter, which was 
delivered to me by Citizen Mujica. I am greatly pleased that the 
magnificent scarlet hussar uniforms have been of use to your 
valiant comrades-in-arms. At the same time I regret that I cannot 
send sufficient uniforms for the entire brave army of the Apure. 
This apparel was few in number, and, as it was the best, it had to 
be used for the English troops and the dragoons of my guard. Only 
a hundred remained, which I sent to you. The bulk of the uniforms 
were given to the English, as they had requested them long ago 
through the acting Major who came here; nevertheless, I am now 
sending you two hundred uniforms of blue cloth, with caps to 
match, for you to do with as you please. I would send many other 
items at this time, but there is no vessel to take them. As soon as the 
expected flecheras 1 arrive, however, I shall send you whatever you 
may need at the moment; you will have no lack of ammunition, 
cartridges, saddles for the English, and many other things of the 
greatest utility, iron included. 

We are, dear General, about to begin the campaign. I had hoped 
to take the infantry to the lower Apure, but this proved impossible 
because all the troops, had they marched by land, would have de- 
serted before reaching their destination; so it has become necessary 


1 A large type of barge, drawing little water, and capable of carrying over 
fifty men, which was used extensively in the Orinoco River region (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


167 

to take Barcelona and Cumana before proceeding to Caracas. This 
operation will be completed without fail by the end of October; and 
early in November, without the slightest doubt, we shall enter 
Caracas, although we cannot yet be sure by what particular route, 
as this operation will depend on the position occupied by the enemy 
troops under Morillo. It is very probable that, once he knows I am 
proceeding along the coast, he may suspect a landing between 
Curiepe and Coro, which I could very easily effect. 

Consequently, I believe that you should move at once toward 
San Carlos, observing as closely as possible Morillos army. Follow 
his route as he advances, both to harass him and to prevent our meet- 
ing him face to face without a horse to call our own, and perhaps 
also with inferior infantry forces; for I cannot be sure what losses 
we may suffer in taking Cumana and Barcelona, and the men may 
desert on the eve of embarkation. Today, I have over 3,000 infantry, 
in spite of great losses in desertions and sickness. 

I intend to land on the coast with the sole object of joining you. 
When you learn that I have landed, you must hasten to meet me. 
This operation must be carried out in four moves: by Curiepe to 
windward of La Guaira; whereupon, if the godos abandon the ter- 
rain to you and fall upon me, you can take the Valles de Aragua, and 
I can easily reembark and, immediately landing at Maiquetia, take 
Caracas the same day; or I can land at Ocumare and rejoin you at 
Maracay or in the neighborhood of Valencia, if you have not suc- 
ceeded in gaining the Valles de Aragua. Finally, I can land at Coro 
if my forces are insufficient to defeat Morillo without cavalry. In 
that case, you must march with all speed, by the easiest and quickest 
road for your cavalry, toward Coro, knowing that I will be marching 
with all possible speed to join you before we meet the enemy army. 

General Sedenos division, which must exceed 1,300 or 1,500 men, 
will then move upon El Calvario, Calabozo, El Sombrero, and 
San Pablo, combining its operations with yours. I hope for great 
success in this new campaign, especially if you act with the same 
energy and good fortune as heretofore. I also trust that you will 
acknowledge receipt of this letter and of the official instructions 
that I now send you, setting forth clearly and distinctly what 
you can accomplish, so that I shall not commit myself to a des- 
perate enterprise in which all may be lost I have not adopted 
this plan from choice, but from necessity, in order to avoid los- 
ing troops on such a long march overland. Send me your reply 
in duplicate, so that one copy may arrive if the other is lost, 


i68 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


and do the same with all further communications; I shall follow 
the same procedure. 

I repeat, our operations against the province of Caracas will begin 
early in November, and it is imperative that you begin yours im- 
mediately upon receipt of this letter, so that we may all work simul- 
taneously and in concert. 

Since your infantry is small, it would be very useful for you to 
mount them as light cavalry; on the other hand, the hussars should 
shoulder rifles and work on foot with the infantry when circum- 
stances require. By this means two things will be accomplished: you 
will safeguard your infantry on the march and in retreat; and, at 
the same time, the llaneros, not being obliged to march on foot, will 
take more kindly to the musket. The moment the infantry dismounts, 
there must always be a picket of lancers ready to take the horses, in 
order to guard them and to lead them to the most convenient place. 
Each lancer can take care of eight horses, if the reins are linked in ac- 
cordance with the practice of the dragoons upon dismounting. I be- 
lieve that this expedient will be of service to you in the present cir- 
cumstances. 

Have it voiced about that I am coming your way. Keep saying that 
you expect me, so that the enemy will not know which way I am 
headed; though he will not believe you, he will still be hesitant and, 
at the outset especially, this is worth a good deal. 

Good-bye, dear General, and you may command your affectionate 
and devoted friend. 


68. To General Jos£ Tadeo Monagas 
[Letterbook] 

Angostura, December 7, 1818. 

The day before yesterday I received your official letter, dated at 
El Pao, the 3d instant, in which you announce, to my immense satis- 
faction, that you have executed the order which sent you to that 
point. 

I have just received an official letter of December 1, from General 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 1 69 

P&ez, and a letter from General Anzodtegui. They both tell me that 
the enemy, numbering 5,000 men, will attempt to reach the Apure 
River by way of Calabozo and Barinas, and that they hope to encoun- 
ter him at San Juan de Payara, that being the best place to maneu- 
ver with the cavalry. General Sedeno is to bring the 200 or 300 men 
that he was to have taken to the infantry forces located on the lower 
Apure; these should by now have reached their destination. These 
troops, however, cannot be pitted against the enemy who has over 
3,000 infantry, whereas we, because of our great losses through 
sickness, can hardly count on 1,200, in addition to 400 hussars who 
have had infantry training. General Anzoategui assures me that 
nothing can be done with less than 2,000 infantry, which is, indeed, 
only too apparent. On this account, I have determined to go myself 
to the lower Apure with 800 or 1,000 infantry, the most that I can 
hope to obtain from General Marino s troops and from those that you 
command. 

To save the Republic, therefore, we must unite our entire infantry 
force to combat Morillo; otherwise, between casualties and desertions, 
we shall lose these troops without having used them to advantage, 
and the enemy will remain intact, if not stronger than before. It is 
absolutely indispensable, I repeat, to unite all our forces and to inflict 
a great defeat on the enemy this summer. To carry out this impor- 
tant objective, I trust you wfll exert every effort within your power to 
make available to me, at the mouth of the Pao [River], by the 
fifteenth or twentieth of this month, 600 infantry from your forces; 
but do not let them know they are to go on the march, or we shall 
certainly lose them. It may be given out that they are coming to be 
outfitted, or that the enemy is approaching the city of Guayana by 
this or that point, and that you have orders to come to the assistance 
of that town. In short, adopt whatever means you think best to this 
end. 

I shall leave you with the skeleton of another new battalion with 
all the arms, equipment, uniforms, cartridges, etc. required to organize 
it, and when we meet we shall plan the operations which you are to 
carry out in defense of your province. 

Under this same date I am writing to General Marino, ordering 
him to take the infantry under his command to the mouths of the 
Pao to be armed, equipped, and uniformed. My aide-de-camp Pil- 
dain, the bearer of this letter, will give you any particulars you desire. 

God keep you, etc. 


170 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


69. To General J[uan] B[autista] Arismendi 
[Letterbook] 

Angostura, December 16, 1818. 

To His Excellency: 

Your Excellency’s communications of September 21 and 22, and 
October 7 and 9 last, are the only ones which I have received from 
Your Excellency in a long time. Notwithstanding, my correspondence 
to Your Excellency has been most frequent, and it has been, for 
security, dispatched by various routes, that is, by a skiff from Maturin 
bringing you my commissioner, Lieutenant Colonel Avendano; 
through my correspondent in Trinidad, Mr. Guillermo White; and 
on ships leaving here bound for your island. 1 In spite of all this I 
have had no news of either Avendano or Your Excellency. I have 
learned of the successes obtained by our privateers against the 
Spaniards only by reports from Martinique and other islands of the 
Antilles. A schooner which arrived yesterday from Martinique re- 
ported vaguely that His Excellency Admiral Brion had taken three 
Spanish vessels, and Commodore Joly, twenty-two, bound for La 
Guaira from Curasao. 

My anxiety concerning Avendano, who left Maturin about Novem- 
ber 4, and the immediacy of my trip to the Apure, have prompted 
me to send this courier to inform Your Excellency of my operations 
and of your assignment during my campaign in the west. 

On the 20th instant, Monagas will march to the Apure with all 
the infantry in the brigade. Sedeno’s division of more than 800 men 
was at the mouth of the Apure River on the 8th of this month, and 
should by now be in San Fernando. My guard, under General 
Anzoategui, reached that city on November 23, and, on December 1, 
the army commanded by General Paez consisted of 3,700 men, horse 
and foot. I am bringing the habiliments stored here, but they are 
scarcely sufficient to outfit the army there assembled. I am also 
taking arms and equipment, and the operations of the campaign will 
begin the moment I arrive, as all is ready. The enemy occupies Cala- 
bozo and Barinas, and, although there is some difference in reports 
as to the forces which Calzada and Morales have in those towns, I 
estimate that there will be at most about 3,000 men, mainly infantry. 
Our Army of the West will have not less than 5,500 to 6,000 men, all 
reasonably well trained and fully armed and with over 3,000 horses 


1 Margarita (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


I 7 I 

among them. Thus far the enemy has acted with a prudence amount- 
ing almost to timidity: he has sent out only a few bands of skirmishers 
and these have each time been defeated by our men, who are thus 
able to take the measure of the opposing forces. I sincerely believe 
that, should the enemy collect his forces and risk a batde, the Re- 
public would be freed forever. 

While I conduct my operations in the west, General Bermudez, 
the military governor-general of the province of Cumana, will cover 
that province with the forces in his division and with those which, 
routed at Cariaco on October 31, are now gathered together by 
Colonel Montes; the latter alone exceed 600 men. The Colonel is 
also to continue to assemble and organize all men who can be re- 
cruited on the coast of Giiiria and in the rest of the province. The 
light squadron commanded by Captain Antonio Diaz is also under 
the orders of General Bermudez. He will operate wherever required, 
on the Orinoco or on the coast, according to circumstances and the 
orders he may receive from the General. It is improbable that the 
enemy means to attack this province of Guayana, but, in the event 
of an attack, General Bermudez, with his division and the light 
forces under Captain Diaz, will come to its assistance, as will the 
troops remaining in this capital, in Baja Guayana, and in Las 
Misiones. These forces, coupled with the squadron which is to return 
here immediately upon my arrival in San Fernando, will be more than 
enough to stop any attempted invasion of the province of Guayana. 
Furthermore, General Sedeno s cavalry division and the battalions of 
Angostura and Bajo Orinoco, which are constantly improving in 
numbers and in discipline, will remain in the provinces. General 
Bermudez is authorized to operate at large, according to circum- 
stances. He is to defend this place, if it is invaded. He may attack 
Cumand, or make incursions and landings along the coast to wind- 
ward of La Guaira by way of Curiepe or El Tuy or wherever he sees 
fit, using the light squadron and obtaining auxiliary troops from 
Your Excellency and provisions or larger ships from the Admiral, 
according to the operations he undertakes. Your Excellency will pro- 
vide him with every facility. 

His Excellency General Marino is in Maturin with the forces that 
he has assembled. He will march to Pao to join General Monagas, 
who has received fresh supplies to raise several infantry corps and 
who retains his entire cavalry. General Zaraza covers his former 
positions with his brigade, and he is also raising infantry corps. The 
Council of Government, which is located in this capital, will con- 




SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


tinue to exercise its vested functions and will provide the divisions 
with whatever they require. 

I have previously had the pleasure of apprising Your Excellency 
of the victories which were gained by Generals Monagas and Sederio 
against the dissidents of Chamariapa and Giiere and against the 
rebel Torralva. I now add that General Sedeno completely de- 
stroyed, on the 5th instant, near Cabruta, the party of over 100 men 
under the Samunos, killing eleven and taking more than forty 
prisoners. This sally was won with only forty carabineers detached 
from Sedenos division. He also took over 200 horses and many 
saddles, lances, and carbines. I have also had the pleasure of sending 
Your Excellency the decree convoking the new Congress and the 
Declaration of the Government and People of Venezuela to all Na- 
tions, all of which I assume Your Excellency has received. I expressly 
charge Your Excellency with the execution of the decree on that 
island, as the Congress must convene on January 1, 1819, and the 
election returns for the deputies from some provinces have already 
been received. 

General Pdez, in his latest communication, informs me that an 
enemy force was surprised at Santa Barbara. After they had lost many, 
killed and wounded, sixty-nine of the enemy were taken prisoner. 

Some time ago I asked Your Excellency to send to this place a 
young man by the name of P6rez who took ship in Guayana la Vieja 
on the brig Apure, and who knows the printing trade. The govern- 
ment printer has long been ill and there is no one to run the printing 
office. I particularly recommend that Your Excellency order this 
young man to this capital as quickly as possible. 

As early as November 4, at Maturin, I urged His Excellency, Ad- 
miral Bri6n, that, after placing at General Bermudez' disposal the 
uniforms, arms, and equipment which he had requested from those 
brought by the brig Imogen , now El Libertador , the remainder of 
the cargo should definitely be sent to this capital as I am in urgent 
need of it. If the Admiral has not arrived at Margarita Island, Your 
Excellency must attend to this. 

God keep you, etc. 



Crossing of the Andes, 1819. 





1819 


70. Address Delivered at the Inauguration of the Second 
National Congress of Venezuela in Angostura 

[Correo de Orinoco, Nos. 19, 20, 21, 22, February 20-March 13, 1819] 

Angostura, February 15, 1819. 

Gentlemen: 

Fortunate is the citizen, who, under the emblem of his command, 
has convoked this assembly of the national sovereignty so that it may 
exercise its absolute will! I, therefore, place myself among those 
most favored by Divine Providence, for I have had the honor of 
uniting the representatives of the people of Venezuela in this august 
Congress, the source of legitimate authority, the custodian of the 
sovereign will, and the arbiter of the Nations destiny. 

In returning to the representatives of the people the Supreme 
Power which was entrusted to me, I gratify not only my own inner- 
most desires but also those of my fellow-citizens and of future 
generations, who trust to your wisdom, rectitude, and prudence in 
all things. Upon the fulfillment of this grateful obligation, I shall 
be released from the immense authority with which I have been 
burdened and from the unlimited responsibility which has weighed 
so heavily upon my slender resources. Only the force of necessity, 
coupled with the imperious will of the people, compelled me to 
assume the fearful and dangerous post of Dictator and Supreme Chief 
of the Republic . But now I can breathe more freely, for I am re- 
turning to you this authority which I have succeeded in maintaining 
at the price of so much danger, hardship, and suffering, amidst the 
worst tribulations suffered by any society. 

The period in the history of the Republic over which I presided 
was not one of mere political storm; nor was it simply a bloody war 
or merely popular anarchy. It was, indeed, the culmination of every 
disruptive force. It was the flood-tide of a devastating torrent which 
overran the good earth of Venezuela. What barriers could one man— 
a man such as myself— erect to stay the onrush of such devastation? In 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


174 

the midst of that sea of troubles, I was but a mere plaything in the 
hurricane of revolution that tossed me about like so much straw. I 
could do neither good nor evil. Irresistible forces directed the course 
of our events. To attribute these forces to me would not be just, for 
it would place upon me an importance that I do not merit. Do you 
wish to know who is responsible for the events of the past and the 
present? Consult the annals of Spain, of America, and of Venezuela; 
examine the Laws of the Indies , 1 the one-time system of mandatarios , 2 
the influence of religion and of foreign rule; observe the first acts of 
the republican government, the ferocity of our enemies, and our 
national character. Do not question me about the effects of these 
ever-to-be-lamented catastrophes; for I am but a simple instrument of 
the great driving forces that have left their mark on Venezuela. 
Nevertheless, my life, my conduct, my every public and private 
action— all are subject to public censure. Representatives! You must 
judge my actions. I submit the record of my rule for your impartial 
verdict: I shall add nothing in its favor, for I have already said all 
that can be said in my behalf. If I obtain your approbation, I shall 
have achieved the sublime title of Good Citizen, which I prefer to 
that of Liberator given me by Venezuela, or that of Pacificator ac- 
corded me by Cundinamarca, or to any title the world at large 
might confer upon me. 

Legislators! I deliver into your hands the supreme rule of Vene- 
zuela. Yours is now the august duty of consecrating yourselves to 
the achievement of felicity of the Republic; your hands hold the 
scales of our destiny, the measure of our glory. They shall seal the 
decrees that will insure our liberty. At this moment the Supreme 
Chief of the Republic is no more than just a plain citizen, and such 
he wishes to remain until his death. I shall, however, serve as a 
soldier so long as any foe remains in Venezuela. Our country has 
a multitude of worthy sons who are capable of directing her progress. 
Talent, virtue, experience, and all else needed to command free men 
are the heritage of many who represent the people here; and outside 
this Sovereign Body there are citizens who at all times have shown 
courage in facing danger, prudence in avoiding it, and the ability, 
moreover, to govern themselves and others. These illustrious men will 
undoubtedly deserve the support of the Congress, and they will be 

*That body of law passed by the Council of Indies in Madrid, and other 
kindred councils, pertaining exclusively to Spains colonial possessions (ed.). 

8 The Spanish colonial system of control of the colonies exclusively by native- 
born Spaniards (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


175 

entrusted with the government which I now so sincerely and gladly 
relinquish forever. 

The continuance of authority in the same individual has frequently 
meant the end of democratic governments. Repeated elections are 
essential in popular systems of government, for nothing is more peril- 
ous than to permit one citizen to retain power for an extended period. 
The people become accustomed to obeying him, and he forms the 
habit of commanding them; herein lie the origins of usurpation and 
tyranny. A just zeal is the guarantee of republican liberty. Our citi- 
zens must with good reason learn to fear lest the magistrate who 
has governed them long will govern them forever. 

Since, therefore, by this profession of mine in support of Vene- 
zuela’s freedom I may aspire to the glory of being reckoned among 
her most faithful sons, allow me, Gendemen, to expound, with the 
frankness of a true republican, my respectful opinion on a Plan of a 
Constitution, which I take the liberty of submitting to you as testi- 
mony of the candor and sincerity of my sentiments. As this plan 
concerns the welfare of all, I venture to assume that I have the right 
to be heard by the representatives of the people. I well know that 
your wisdom needs no counsel, and I know also that my plan may 
perhaps appear to be mistaken and impracticable. But I implore 
you, Gentlemen, receive this work with benevolence, for it is more 
a tribute of my sincere deference to the Congress than an act of pre- 
sumption. Moreover, as your function is to create a body politic, or, 
it might be said, to create an entire society while surrounded by every 
obstacle that a most peculiar and difficult situation can present, per- 
haps the voice of one citizen may reveal the presence of a hidden or 
unknown danger. 

Let us review the past to discover the base upon which the Repub- 
lic of Venezuela is founded. 

America, in separating from the Spanish monarchy, found herself 
in a situation similar to that of the Roman Empire when its enormous 
framework fell to pieces in the midst of the ancient world. Each 
Roman division then formed an independent nation in keeping with 
its location or interests; but this situation differed from America s in 
that those members proceeded to reestablish their former associations. 
We, on the contrary, do not even retain the vestiges of our original 
being. We are not Europeans; we are not Indians; we are but a 
mixed species of aborigines and Spaniards. Americans by birth and 
Europeans by law, we find ourselves engaged in a dual conflict: we 
are disputing with the natives for titles of ownership, and at the 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


176 

same time we are struggling to maintain ourselves in the country 
that gave us birth against the opposition of the invaders. Thus our 
position is most extraordinary and complicated. But there is more. 
As our rdle has always been strictly passive and our political existence 
nil, we find that our quest for liberty is now even more difficult of 
accomplishment; for we, having been placed in a state lower than 
slavery, had been robbed not only of our freedom but also of the 
right to exercise an active domestic tyranny. Permit me to explain 
this paradox. 

In absolute systems, the central power is unlimited. The will of 
the despot is the supreme law, arbitrarily enforced by subordinates 
who take part in the organized oppression in proportion to the 
authority that they wield. They are charged with civil, political, 
military, and religious functions; but, in the final analysis, the 
satraps of Persia are Persian, the pashas of the Grand Turk are 
Turks, and the sultans of Tartary are Tartars. China does not seek 
her mandarins in the homeland of Genghis Khan, her conqueror. 
America, on the contrary, received everything from Spain, who, in 
effect, deprived her of the experience that she would have gained 
from the exercise of an active tyranny by not allowing her to take 
part in her own domestic affairs and administration. This exclusion 
made it impossible for us to acquaint ourselves with the management 
of public affairs; nor did we enjoy that personal consideration, of 
such great value in major revolutions, that the brilliance of power 
inspires in the eyes of the multitude. In brief, Gendemen, we were 
deliberately kept in ignorance and cut off from the world in all 
matters relating to the science of government. 

Subject to the threefold yoke of ignorance, tyranny, and vice, the 
American people have been unable to acquire knowledge, power, or 
[civic] virtue. The lessons we received and the models we studied, as 
pupils of such pernicious teachers, were most destructive. We have 
been ruled more by deceit than by force, and we have been degraded 
more by vice than by superstition. Slavery is the daughter of Dark- 
ness: an ignorant people is a blind instrument of its own destruction. 
Ambition and intrigue abuse the credulity and experience of men 
lacking all political, economic, and civic knowledge; they adopt pure 
illusion as reality; they take license for liberty, treachery for patriot- 
ism, and vengeance for justice. This situation is similar to that of 
the robust blind man who, beguiled by his strength, strides forward 
with all the assurance of one who can see, but, upon hitting every 
variety of obstacle, finds himself unable to retrace his steps. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


177 

If a people, perverted by their training, succeed in achieving their 
liberty, they will soon lose it, for it would be of no avail to endeavor 
to explain to them that happiness consists in the practice of virtue; 
that the rule of law is more powerful than the rule of tyrants, because, 
as the laws are more inflexible, everyone should submit to their 
beneficent austerity; that proper morals, and not force, are the 
bases of law; and that to practice justice is to practice liberty. There- 
fore, Legislators, your work is so much the more arduous, inasmuch 
as you have to reeducate men who have been corrupted by er- 
roneous illusions and false incentives. Liberty, says Rousseau, is a 
succulent morsel, but one difficult to digest. Our weak fellow-citi- 
zens will have to strengthen their spirit greatly before they can digest 
the wholesome nutriment of freedom. Their limbs benumbed by 
chains, their sight dimmed by the darkness of dungeons, and their 
strength sapped by the pestilence of servitude, are they capable of 
marching toward the august temple of Liberty without faltering? 
Can they come near enough to bask in its brilliant rays and to breathe 
freely the pure air which reigns therein? 

Legislators, meditate well before you choose. Forget not that you 
are to lay the political foundation for a newly born nation which can 
rise to the heights of greatness that Nature has marked out for it 
if you but proportion this foundation in keeping with the high plane 
that it aspires to attain. Unless your choice is based upon the peculiar 
tutelary experience of the Venezuelan people — a factor that should 
guide you in determining the nature and form of government you 
are about to adopt for the well-being of the people— and, I repeat, 
unless you happen upon the right type of government, the result of 
our reforms will again be slavery. 

The history of bygone ages affords you examples of thousands 
of governments. Visualize the nations that have shone in brightest 
splendor and you will be grieved to see that virtually all the world 
has been, and still is, the victim of its governments. You will note 
numerous systems of governing men, but always their purpose has 
been to oppress them. If our habit of looking upon the human species 
as being led by its own shepherds did not diminish the horror of so 
distressing a spectacle, we should be stunned to see our docile species 
grazing upon the surface of the earth, like meek flocks destined to 
feed their cruel keepers. Nature, in truth, endows us at birth with 
the instinctive desire for freedom; but, be it laziness or some tend- 
ency inherent in humanity, it is obvious that mankind rests uncon- 
cerned and accepts things as they are, even though it is bound 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


I 7 8 

forcibly in fetters. As we contemplate humanity in this state of 
prostitution, it would appear that we have every right to persuade 
ourselves that most men hold this humiliating maxim to be the 
truth: It is harder to maintain the balance of liberty than to endure 
the weight of tyranny. Would that this maxim, which goes counter 
to the morality of Nature, were false. Would that this axiom were 
not sanctioned by man’s lack of concern respecting his most sacred 
rights! 

Many ancient and modern nations have shaken off oppression; 
yet those who have enjoyed even a few precious moments of liberty 
are rare, as they have speedily returned to their old political vices; 
because peoples rather than governments repeatedly drag tyranny in 
their train. The habit of being ruled makes them insensible to the 
attractions of honor and national prosperity, and they regard with 
indifference the glory of living in the free sway of liberty, under the 
protection of laws dictated by their own free will. The records of 
the universe proclaim this awful truth. 

Only democracy, in my opinion, is amenable to absolute liberty. 
But what democratic government has simultaneously enjoyed power, 
prosperity, and permanence? On the other hand, have not aristocracy 
and monarchy held great and powerful empires together century 
after century? Is there any government older than that of China? 
What republic has lasted longer than Sparta or Venice? Did not the 
Roman Empire conquer the earth? Has not France had fourteen 
centuries of monarchy? Is there any nation greater than England? 
Yet these nations have been or still are aristocracies and monarchies. 

Despite these bitter reflections, I experience a surge of joy when I 
witness the great advances that our Republic has made since it began 
its noble career. Loving what is most useful, animated by what is 
most just, and aspiring to what is most perfect, Venezuela, on break- 
ing away from Spain, has recovered her independence, her freedom, 
her equality, and her national sovereignty. By establishing a demo- 
cratic republic, she has proscribed monarchy, distinctions, nobility, 
prerogatives, and privileges. She has declared for the rights of man 
and freedom of action, thought, speech, and press. These eminently 
liberal acts, because of the sincerity that has inspired them, will never 
cease to be admired. The first Congress of Venezuela has indelibly 
stamped upon the annals of our laws the majesty of the people, and, 
in placing its seal upon the social document best calculated to develop 
the well-being of the nation, that Congress has fittingly given expres- 
sion to this thought. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


179 

I am forced to gather all my strength and to exert every effort of 
which I am capable in order to perceive the supreme good embodied 
in this immortal Code of our rights and laws. But how can I venture 
to say it! Shall I dare, by my criticism, to profane the sacred tablets 
of our laws . . . [sic]? There are some feelings that a true patriot 
cannot retain in his heart. They overflow, forced out by their own 
violence, and in spite of one's efforts to restrain them an inner force 
will make them known. I am thoroughly imbued with the idea that 
the government of Venezuela should be reformed; and, although 
many prominent citizens think as I do, not all of them possess the 
courage necessary to recommend publicly the adoption of new 
principles. This consideration obliges me to take the initiative in a 
matter of the greatest importance— a matter in which the utmost 
audacity is required— the offering of advice to the councilors of the 
people. 

The more I admire the excellence of the federal Constitution of 
Venezuela, the more I am convinced of the impossibility of its ap- 
plication to our state. And, to my way of thinking, it is a marvel that 
its prototype in North America endures so successfully and has not 
been overthrown at the first sign of adversity or danger. Although the 
people of North America are a singular model of political virtue and 
moral rectitude; although that nation was cradled in liberty, reared 
on freedom, and maintained by liberty alone; and— I must reveal 
everything— although those people, so lacking in many respects, are 
unique in the history of mankind, it is a marvel, I repeat, that so 
weak and complicated a government as the federal system has 
managed to govern them in the difficult and trying circumstances of 
their past. But, regardless of the effectiveness of this form of govern- 
ment with respect to North America, I must say that it has never 
for a moment entered my mind to compare the position and character 
of two states as dissimilar as the English-American and the Spanish- 
American. Would it not be most difficult to apply to Spain the English 
system of political, civil, and religious liberty? Hence, it would be 
even more difficult to adapt to Venezuela the laws of North America. 
Does not L’Esprit des lois state that laws should be suited to the 
people for whom they are made; that it would be a major coincidence 
if those of one nation could be adapted to another; that laws must 
take into account the physical conditions of the country, climate, 
character of the land, location, size, and mode of living of the people; 
that they should be in keeping with the degree of liberty that the 
Constitution can sanction respecting the religion of the inhabitants, 


l8o SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

their inclinations, resources, number, commerce, habits, and cus- 
toms? This is the code we must consult, not the code of Washington! 

The Venezuelan Constitution, although based upon the most 
perfect of constitutions from the standpoint of the correctness of its 
principles and the beneficent effects of its administration, differed 
fundamentally from the North American Constitution on one cardi- 
nal point, and, without doubt, the most important point. The Congress 
of Venezuela, like the North American legislative body, participates 
in some of the duties vested in the executive power. We, however, 
have subdivided the executive power by vesting it in a collective 
body. Consequently, this executive body has been subject to the dis- 
advantages resulting from the periodic existence of a government 
which is suspended and dissolved whenever its members adjourn. 
Our executive triumvirate lacks, so to speak, unity, continuity, and 
individual responsibility. It is deprived of prompt action, continuous 
existence, true uniformity, and direct responsibility. The government 
that does not possess these things which give it a morality of its own 
must be deemed a nonentity. 

Although the powers of the President of the United States are 
limited by numerous restrictions, he alone exercises all the govern- 
mental functions which the Constitution has delegated to him; thus 
there is no doubt but that his administration must be more uniform, 
constant, and more truly his own than an administration wherein the 
power is divided among a number of persons, a grouping that is noth- 
ing less than a monstrosity. The judicial power in Venezuela is similar 
to that of North America: its duration is not defined; it is temporary 
and not for life; and it enjoys all the independence proper to the 
judiciary. 

The first Congress, in its federal Constitution, responded more to 
the spirit of the provinces than to the sound idea of creating an in- 
divisible and centralized republic. In this instance, our legislators 
yielded to the ill-considered pleadings of those men from the provinces 
who were captivated by the apparent brilliance of the happiness of 
the North American people, believing that the blessings they enjoy 
result exclusively from their form of government rather than from the 
character and customs of the citizens. In effect, the United States 
example, because of their remarkable prosperity, was one too tempting 
not to be followed. Who could resist the powerful attraction of full 
and absolute enjoyment of sovereignty, independence, and freedom? 
Who could resist the devotion inspired by an intelligent government 
that has not only blended public and private rights but has also 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


181 


based its supreme law respecting the desires of the individual upon 
common consent? Who could resist the rule of a beneficent govern- 
ment which, with a skilled, dextrous, and powerful hand always and 
in all regions, directs its resources toward social perfection, the sole 
aim of human institutions? 

But no matter how tempting this magnificent federative system 
might have appeared, and regardless of its possible effect, the Vene- 
zuelans were not prepared to enjoy it immediately upon casting off 
their chains. We were not prepared for such good, for good, like 
evil, results in death when it is sudden and excessive. Our moral 
fibre did not then possess the stability necessary to derive benefits 
from a wholly representative government; a government so sublime, 
in fact, that it might more nearly befit a republic of saints. 

Representatives of the Peoplel You are called upon to confirm or 
to suppress whatever may appear to you worthy of preservation, modi- 
fication, or rejection in our social compact. The task of correcting the 
work of our first legislators is yours. I should like to say that it is 
your duty to cloak some of the charms that are displayed in our 
political code; for not every heart is capable of admiring all beauty, 
nor are all eyes able to gaze upon the heavenly light of perfection. 
The Book of the Apostles, the teachings of Jesus contained in that 
divine work, so sublime and so sacred, that Providence has sent us 
for the betterment of mankind, is now a rain of fire in Constan- 
tinople; indeed, Asia would burst into fiery flames if this Book of 
Peace were suddenly imposed upon her as a code of religion, law, 
and customs. 

Permit me to call the attention of the Congress to a matter that may 
be of vital importance. We must keep in mind that our people are 
neither European nor North American; rather, they are a mixture of 
African and the Americans who originated in Europe. Even Spain 
herself has ceased to be European because of her African blood, her 
institutions, and her character. It is impossible to determine with any 
degree of accuracy where we belong in the human family. The 
greater portion of the native Indians has been annihilated; Spaniards 
have mixed with Americans and Africans, and Africans with Indians 
and Spaniards. While we have all been born of the same mother, our 
fathers, different in origin and in blood, are foreigners, and all differ 
visibly as to the color of their skin: a dissimilarity which places upon 
us an obligation of the greatest importance. 

Under the Constitution, which interprets the laws of Nature, all 
citizens of Venezuela enjoy complete political equality. Although 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


l82 

equality may not have been the political dogma of Athens, France, 
or North America, we must consecrate it here in order to correct 
the disparity that apparently exists. My opinion, Legislators, is that 
the fundamental basis of our political system hinges directly and 
exclusively upon the establishment and practice of equality in Vene- 
zuela. Most wise men concede that men are born with equal rights to 
share the benefits of society, but it does not follow that all men are 
born equally gifted to attain every rank. All men should practice vir- 
tue, but not all do; all ought to be courageous, but not all are; all should 
possess talents, but not everyone does. Herein are the real distinc- 
tions which can be observed among individuals even in the most 
liberally constituted society. If the principle of political equality is 
generally recognized, so also must be the principle of physical and 
moral inequality. Nature makes men unequal in intelligence, tem- 
perament, strength, and character. Laws correct this disparity by 
so placing the individual within society that education, industry, arts, 
services, and virtues give him a fictitious equality that is properly 
termed political and social. The idea of a classless state, wherein 
diversity increases in proportion to the rise in population, was an 
eminently beneficial inspiration. By this step alone, cruel discord has 
been completely eliminated. How much jealousy, rivalry, and hate 
have thus been averted! 

Having dealt with justice and humanity, let us now give attention 
to politics and society, and let us resolve the difficulties inherent in 
a system so simple and natural, yet so weak that the slightest obstacle 
can upset and destroy it. The diversity of racial origin will require 
an infinitely firm hand and great tactfulness in order to manage this 
heterogeneous society, whose complicated mechanism is easily dam- 
aged, separated, and disintegrated by the slightest controversy. 

The most perfect system of government is that which results in 
the greatest possible measure of happiness and the maximum of social 
security [seguridad social ] and political stability. The laws enacted 
by the first Congress gave us reason to hope that happiness would be 
the lot of Venezuela; and, through your laws, we must hope that 
security and stability will perpetuate this happiness. You must solve 
the problem. But how, having broken all the shackles of our 
former oppression, can we accomplish the enormous task of prevent- 
ing the remnants of our past fetters from becoming liberty-destroying 
weapons? The vestiges of Spanish domination will long be with us 
before we can completely eradicate them: the contagion of despotism 
infests the atmosphere about us, and neither the fires of war nor 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


183 

the healing properties of our salutary laws have purified the air we 
breathe. Our hands are now free, but our hearts still suffer the ills 
of slavery. When man loses freedom, said Homer, he loses half his 
spirit. 

Venezuela had, has, and should have a republican government. 
Its principles should be the sovereignty of the people, division of 
powers, civil liberty, proscription of slavery, and the abolition of 
monarchy and privileges. We need equality to recast, so to speak, 
into a unified nation, the classes of men, political opinions, and 
public customs. Let us now consider the vast field of problems yet 
to be traversed. Let us focus our attention upon the dangers we must 
avoid. Let history serve us as a guide in this survey. First, Athens 
affords us the most brilliant example of an absolute democracy, but 
at the same time Athens herself is the most melancholy example of 
the extreme weakness of this type of government. The wisest legis- 
lator in Greece did not see his republic survive ten years; and he 
suffered the humiliation of admitting that absolute democracy is in- 
adequate in governing any form of society, even the most cultured, 
temperate, and limited, because its brilliance comes only in lightning 
flashes of liberty. We must recognize, therefore, that, although Solon 
disillusioned the world, he demonstrated to society how difficult it 
is to govern men by laws alone. 

The Republic of Sparta, which might appear to be but a chimeri- 
cal invention, produced more tangible results than all the ingenious 
labors of Solon. Glory, virtue, morality, and, consequently, national 
felicity, were the results of Lycurgus’ legislation. Although two kings 
in one state meant two monsters to devour it, Sparta had little to 
regret because of its dual throne; whereas Athens promised itself a 
most brilliant future replete with absolute sovereignty, free and 
frequent election of magistrates, and moderate, wise, and politic 
laws. Pisistratus, the usurper and tyrant, accomplished more for 
Athens than did her laws; and Pericles, although also an usurper, 
was her most useful citizen. The Republic of Thebes existed only 
during the lifetimes of Pelopidas and Epaminondas; because there 
are times when men, not principles, constitute governments. Codes, 
systems, statutes, wise as they may be, are useless works having but 
small influence on societies: virtuous men, patriotic men, learned 
men make republics. 

The Roman Constitution brought power and fortune such as no 
other people in the world have ever known. It did not provide for 
an exact distribution of powers. The consuls, senate, and people were 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


184 

alternately legislators, magistrates, and judges; everyone participated 
in all powers. The executive, comprising two consuls, was subject 
to the same weakness as was that of Sparta. Despite this weakness, 
the Republic did not experience the disastrous discord that would 
appear to have been unavoidable in a magistrature composed of two 
individuals with equal authority, each possessing the powers of a 
monarch. A government whose sole purpose was conquest would 
hardly seem destined to insure the happiness of a nation; but an 
enormous and strictly warlike government lifted Rome to the high- 
est splendor of virtue and glory, and made of this earth a Roman 
dominion, thereby demonstrating to man what political virtues can 
accomplish and the relative unimportance of institutions. 

Passing from ancient to modern times, we find England and 
France attracting the attention of all nations and affording them a 
variety of lessons in matters of government. The evolution [revohtr 
ci6n] of these two great peoples, like a flaming meteor, has flooded 
the world with such a profusion of political enlightenment that today 
every thinking person is aware of the rights and duties of man and 
the nature of the virtues and vices of governments. All can now 
appreciate the intrinsic merit of the speculative theories of modem 
philosophers and legislators. In fact, this political star, in its illumi- 
nating career, has even fired the hearts of the apathetic Spaniards, 
who, having also been thrown into the political whirlpool, made 
ephemeral efforts to establish liberty; but, recognizing their in- 
capacity for living under the sweet rule of law, they have returned 
to their immemorial practices of imprisonment and burnings at the 
stake. 

Here, Legislators, is the place to repeat what the eloquent Volney 
says in the preface of his Ruins of Palmyra: “To the newborn peoples 
of the Spanish Indies, to the generous leaders who guide them 
toward freedom: may the mistakes and misfortunes of the Old 
World teach wisdom and happiness to the New.” May the teach- 
ings of experience be not lost; and may the schools of Greece, Rome, 
France, England, and North America instruct us in the difficult sci- 
ence of creating and preserving nations through laws that are proper, 
just, legitimate, and, above all, useful. We must never forget that the 
excellence of a government lies not in its theories, not in its form or 
mechanism, but in its being suited to the nature and character of the 
nation for which it is instituted. 

Among the ancient and modern nations, Rome and Great Britain 
are the most outstanding. Both were born to govern and to be free 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 1 85 

and both were built not on ostentatious forms of freedom, but upon 
solid institutions. Thus I recommend to you, Representatives, the 
study of the British Constitution, for that body of laws appears des- 
tined to bring about the greatest possible good for the peoples that 
adopt it; but, however perfect it may be, I am by no means proposing 
that you imitate it slavishly. When I speak of the British government, 
I only refer to its republican features; and, indeed, can a political 
system be labelled a monarchy when it recognizes popular sover- 
eignty, division and balance of powers, civil liberty, freedom of con- 
science and of press, and all that is politically sublime? Can there 
be more liberty in any other type of republic? Can more be asked of 
any society? I commend this Constitution to you as that most worthy 
of serving as model for those who aspire to the enjoyment of the 
rights of man and who seek all the political happiness which is com- 
patible with the frailty of human nature. 

Nothing in our fundamental laws would have to be altered were 
we to adopt a legislative power similar to that held by the British 
Parliament Like the North Americans, we have divided national 
representation into two chambers: that of Representatives and the 
Senate. The first is very wisely constituted. It enjoys all its proper 
functions, and it requires no essential revision, because the Constitu- 
tion, in creating it, gave it the form and powers which the people 
deemed necessary in order that they might be legally and properly 
represented. If the Senate were hereditary rather than elective, it 
would, in my opinion, be the basis, the tie, the very soul of our 
republic. In political storms this body would arrest the thunderbolts 
of the government and would repel any violent popular reaction. 
Devoted to the government because of a natural interest in its own 
preservation, a hereditary senate would always oppose any attempt 
on the part of the people to infringe upon the jurisdiction and au- 
thority of their magistrates. It must be confessed that most men are 
unaware of their best interests and that they constantly endeavor to 
assail them in the hands of their custodians— the individual clashes 
with the mass, and the mass with authority. It is necessary, there- 
fore, that in all governments there be a neutral body to protect the 
injured and disarm the offender. To be neutral, this body must not 
owe its origin to appointment by the government or to election by 
the people, if it is to enjoy a full measure of independence which 
neither fears nor expects anything from these two sources of author- 
ity. The hereditary senate, as a part of the people, shares its interests, 
its sentiments, and its spirit. For this reason it should not be pre- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


1 86 

sumed that a hereditary senate would ignore the interests of the 
people or forget its legislative duties. The senators in Rome and in 
the House of Lords in London have been the strongest pillars upon 
which the edifice of political and civil liberty has rested. 

At the outset, these senators should be elected by Congress. The 
successors to this Senate must command the initial attention of the 
government, which should educate them in a colegio designed espe- 
cially to train these guardians and future legislators of the nation. 
They ought to learn the arts, sciences, and letters that enrich 
the mind of a public figure. From childhood they should understand 
the career for which they have been destined by Providence, and 
from earliest youth they should prepare their minds for the dignity 
that awaits them. 

The creation of a hereditary senate would in no way be a viola- 
tion of political equality. I do not solicit the establishment of a 
nobility, for, as a celebrated republican has said, that would simul- 
taneously destroy equality and liberty. What I propose is an office 
for which the candidates must prepare themselves, an office that de- 
mands great knowledge and the ability to acquire such knowledge. 
All should not be left to chance and the outcome of elections. The 
people are more easily deceived than is Nature perfected by art; and, 
although these senators, it is true, would not be bred in an environ- 
ment that is all virtue, it is equally true that they would be raised in 
an atmosphere of enlightened education. Furthermore, the liberators 
of Venezuela are entitled to occupy forever a high rank in the 
Republic that they have brought into existence. I believe that pos- 
terity would view with regret the effacement of the illustrious names 
of its first benefactors. I say, moreover, that it is a matter of public 
interest and national honor, of gratitude on Venezuela’s part, to 
honor gloriously, until the end of time, a race of virtuous, prudent, 
and persevering men who, overcoming every obstacle, have founded 
the Republic at the price of the most heroic sacrifices. And if the 
people of Venezuela do not applaud the elevation of their bene- 
factors, then they are unworthy to be free, and they will never be 
free. 

A hereditary senate, I repeat, will be the fundamental basis of the 
legislative power, and therefore the foundation of the entire govern- 
ment. It will also serve as a counterweight to both government and 
people; and as a neutral power it will weaken the mutual attacks 
of these two eternally rival powers. In all conflicts the calm reason- 
ing of a third party will serve as the means of reconciliation. Thus 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


187 

the Venezuelan senate will give strength to this delicate political 
structure, so sensitive to violent repercussions; it will be the mediator 
that will lull the storms and it will maintain harmony between the 
head and the other parts of this political body. 

No inducement could corrupt a legislative body invested with 
the highest honors, dependent only upon itself, having no fear of the 
people, independent of the government, and dedicated solely to the 
repression of all evil principles and to the advancement of every good 
principle— a legislative body that would be deeply concerned with 
the maintenance of a society, for it would share the consequences, be 
they honorable or disastrous. It has rightly been said that the upper 
house in England is invaluable to that nation because it provides a 
bulwark of liberty; and I would add that the Senate of Venezuela 
would be not only a bulwark of liberty but a bastion of defense, 
rendering the Republic eternal. 

The British executive power possesses all the authority properly 
appertaining to a sovereign, but he is surrounded by a triple line of 
dams, barriers, and stockades. He is the head of the government, but 
his ministers and subordinates rely more upon law than upon his 
authority, as they are personally responsible; and not even decrees of 
royal authority can exempt them from this responsibility. The execu- 
tive is commander in chief of the army and navy; he makes peace and 
declares war; but Parliament annually determines what sums are to 
be paid to these military forces. While the courts and judges are 
dependent on the executive power, the laws originate in and are 
made by Parliament. To neutralize the power of the King, his per- 
son is declared inviolable and sacred; but, while his head is left 
untouched, his hands are tied. The sovereign of England has three 
formidable rivals: his Cabinet, which is responsible to the people 
and to Parliament; the Senate [sic], which, representing the nobility 
of which it is composed, defends the interests of the people; and the 
House of Commons, which serves as the representative body of the 
British people and provides them with a place in which to express 
their opinions. Moreover, as the judges are responsible for the en- 
forcement of the laws, they do not depart from them; and the ad- 
ministrators of the exchequer, being subject to prosecution not only 
for personal infractions but also for those of the government, take 
care to prevent any misuse of public funds. No matter how closely 
we study the composition of the English executive power, we can 
find nothing to prevent its being judged as the most perfect model 
for a kingdom, for an aristocracy, or for a democracy. Give Vene- 


1 88 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


zuela such an executive power in the person of a president chosen 
by the people or their representatives, and you will have taken a 
great step toward national happiness. 

No matter what citizen occupies this office, he will be aided by the 
Constitution, and therein being authorized to do good, he can do no 
harm, because his ministers will cooperate with him only insofar 
as he abides by the law. If he attempts to infringe upon the law, his 
own ministers will desert him, thereby isolating him from the Re- 
public, and they will even bring charges against him in the Senate. 
The ministers, being responsible for any transgressions committed, 
will actually govern, since they must account for their actions. The 
obligation which this system places upon the officials closest to the 
executive power, that is, to take a most interested and active part in 
governmental deliberations and to regard this department as their 
own, is not the smallest advantage of the system. Should the presi- 
dent be a man of no great talent or virtue, yet, notwithstanding his 
lack of these essential qualities, he will be able to discharge his 
duties satisfactorily, for in such a case the ministry, managing every- 
thing by itself, will carry the burdens of the state. 

Although the authority of the executive power in England may 
appear to be extreme, it would, perhaps, not be excessive in the 
Republic of Venezuela. Here the Congress has tied the hands and 
even the heads of its men of state. This deliberative assembly has 
assumed a part of the executive functions, contrary to the maxim of 
Montesquieu, to wit: A representative assembly should exercise no 
active function. It should only make laws and determine whether 
or not those laws are enforced. Nothing is as disturbing to harmony 
among the powers of government as their intermixture. Nothing is 
more dangerous with respect to the people than a weak executive; 
and if a kingdom has deemed it necessary to grant the executive so 
many powers, then in a republic these powers are infinitely more 
indispensable. 

If we examine this difference, we will find that the balance of 
power between the branches of government must be distributed in 
two ways. In republics the executive should be the stronger, for 
everything conspires against it; while in monarchies the legislative 
power should be superior, as everything works in the monarch's 
favor. The people s veneration of royal power results in a self-fascina- 
tion that tends greatly to increase the superstitious respect paid to 
such authority. The splendor inherent in the throne, the crown, and 
the purple; the formidable support that it receives from the nobility; 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


1 89 

the immense wealth that a dynasty accumulates from generation to 
generation; and the fraternal protection that kings grant to one 
another are the significant advantages that work in favor of royal 
authority, thereby rendering it almost unlimited. Consequently, the 
significance of these same advantages should serve to justify the 
necessity of investing the chief magistrate of a republic with a greater 
measure of authority than that possessed by a constitutional prince. 

A republican magistrate is an individual set apart from society, 
charged with checking the impulse of the people toward license and 
the propensity of judges and administrators toward abuse of the laws. 
He is direcdy subject to the legislative body, the senate, and the 
people: he is the one man who resists the combined pressure of the 
opinions, interests, and passions of the social state and who, as 
Carnot states, does little more than struggle constantly with the urge 
to dominate and the desire to escape domination. He is, in brief, an 
athlete pitted against a multitude of athletes. 

This weakness can only be corrected by a strongly rooted force. It 
should be strongly proportioned to meet the resistance which the 
executive must expect from the legislature, from the judiciary, and 
from the people of a republic. Unless the executive has easy access 
to all the [administrative] resources, fixed by a just distribution of 
powers, he inevitably becomes a nonentity or abuses his authority. 
By this I mean that the result will be the death of the government, 
whose heirs are anarchy, usurpation, and tyranny. Some seek to 
check the executive authority by curbs and restrictions, and nothing 
is more just; but it must be remembered that the bonds we seek to 
preserve should, of course, be strengthened, but not tightened. 

Therefore, let the entire system of government be strengthened, 
and let the balance of power be drawn up in such a manner that it 
will be permanent and incapable of decay because of its own tenuity. 
Precisely because no form of government is so weak as the demo- 
cratic, its framework must be firmer, and its institutions must be 
studied to determine their degree of stability. Unless this is done, 
we must plan on the establishment of an experimental rather than a 
permanent system of government; and we will have to reckon with 
an ungovernable, tumultuous, and anarchic society, not with a social 
order where happiness, peace, and justice prevail. 

Legislators, we should not be presumptuous. We should be mod- 
erate in our pretentions. It is not likely that we will secure what man- 
kind has never attained or that which the greatest and wisest nations 
have not acquired. Complete liberty and absolute democracy are but 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


190 

reefs upon which all republican hopes have foundered. Observe the 
ancient republics, the modern republics, and those of most recent 
origin: Virtually all have attempted to establish themselves as abso- 
lute democracies, and almost all have seen their just aspirations 
thwarted. The men who covet legitimate institutions and social 
perfection are indeed worthy of commendation. But who has told 
these men that they now possess the wisdom or practice the virtue 
that is so forcefully demanded by the union of power with justice? 
Only angels, not men, can exist free, peaceful, and happy while 
exercising every sovereign power. 

The people of Venezuela already enjoy the rights that they may 
legitimately and easily exercise. Let us now, therefore, restrain the 
growth of immoderate pretensions which, perhaps, a form of govern- 
ment unsuited to our people might excite. Let us abandon the federal 
forms of government unsuited to us; let us put aside the triumvirate 
which holds the executive power and center it in a president. We 
must grant him sufficient authority to enable him to continue the 
stru ggl e against the obstacles inherent in our recent situation, our 
present state of war, and every variety of foe, foreign and domestic, 
whom we must batde for some time to come. Let the legislature 
relinquish the powers that rightly belong to the executive; let it 
acquire, however, a new consistency, a new influence in the balance 
of authority. Let the courts be strengthened by increasing the sta- 
bility and independence of the judges and by the establishment of 
juries and civil and criminal codes dictated, not by antiquity nor by 
conquering kings, but by the voice of Nature, the cry of Justice, and 
the genius of Wisdom. 

My desire is for every branch of government and administration 
to attain that degree of vigor which alone can insure equilibrium, 
not only among the members of the government, but also among the 
different factions of which our society is composed. It would matter 
little if the springs of a political system were to relax because of its 
weakness, so long as this relaxation itself did not contribute to the 
dissolution of the body social and the ruination of its membership. 
The shouts of humanity, on the battlefields or in tumultuous crowds, 
denounce to the world the blind, unthinking legislators who im- 
agined that experiments with chimerical institutions could be made 
with impunity. All the peoples of the world have sought freedom, 
some by force of arms, others by force of law, passing alternately 
from anarchy to despotism, or from despotism to anarchy. Few peo- 
ples have been content with moderate aims, establishing their in- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR I91 

stitutions according to their means, their character, and their cir- 
cumstances. We must not aspire to the impossible, lest, in trying 
to rise above the realm of liberty, we again descend into the realm 
of tyranny. Absolute liberty invariably lapses into absolute power, 
and the mean between these two extremes is supreme social liberty. 
Abstract theories create the pernicious idea of unlimited freedom. 
Let us see to it that the strength of the public is kept within the 
limits prescribed by reason and interest; that the national will is 
confined within the bonds set by a just power; that the judiciary is 
rigorously controlled by civil and criminal laws, analogous to those 
in our present Constitution— then an equilibrium between the powers 
of government will exist, the conflicts that hamper the progress of 
the state will disappear, and those complications which tend to 
hinder rather than unite society will be eliminated. 

The formation of a stable government requires as a foundation 
a national spirit, having as its objective a uniform concentration on 
two cardinal factors, namely, moderation of the popular will and 
limitation of public authority. The extremes, which these two 
factors theoretically establish, are difficult to define in practice; but 
it can well be conceived that the maxim that must guide them is 
mutual limitation and concentration of power, in order that there 
may be the least possible friction between the popular will and the 
constituted public authority. The science of achieving this balance 
is acquired almost imperceptibly, through practice and study. Prog- 
ress in the practice of this science is hastened by progress in the 
enlightenment of the people, and integrity of mind and spirit speeds 
the progress of enlightenment. 

Love of country, love of law, and respect for magistrates are the 
exalted emotions that must permeate the soul of a republic. The 
Venezuelans love their country, but they cannot love her laws, be- 
cause these, being sources of evil, have been harmful; neither can 
they respect their magistrates, as they have been unjust, while the 
new administrators are scarcely known in the calling which they have 
just entered. Unless there is a sacred reverence for country, laws, 
and authority, society becomes confused, an abyss— an endless con- 
flict of man versus man, group versus group. 

All our moral powers will not suffice to save our infant republic 
from this chaos unless we fuse the mass of the people, the govern- 
ment, the legislation, and the national spirit into a single united 
body. Unity, unity, unity must be our motto in all things. The blood 
of our citizens is varied: let it be mixed for the sake of unity. Our 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


192 

Constitution has divided the powers of government: let them be 
bound together to secure unity. Our laws are but a sad relic of 
ancient and modern despotism. Let this monstrous edifice crumble 
and fall; and, having removed even its ruins, let us erect a temple 
to Justice; and, guided by its sacred inspiration, let us write a code 
of Venezuelan laws. Should we wish to consult monuments of legis- 
lation, those of Great Britain, France, and the United States of 
North America afford us admirable models. 

Popular education should be the primary concern of the paternal 
love of Congress. Morality and enlightenment are the foundations 
of a republic; morality and enlightenment constitute our primary 
needs. From Athens let us take her Areopagus and her guardians 
of custom and law; from Rome, her censors and domestic tribunals; 
and, having effected a holy alliance of these moral institutions, let 
us revive in the world the idea of a people who, not content to be 
free and strong, desire also to be virtuous. From Sparta let us take 
her austere institutions; and, when from these three springs we 
have made a fountain of virtue, let us endow our republic with a 
fourth power having jurisdiction over the youth, the hearts of men, 
public spirit, good customs, and republican ethics. Let us establish 
an Areopagus to watch over the education of our youth and to pro- 
mote national enlightenment, in order that it may purify every in- 
stance of corruption in the Republic and denounce ingratitude, 
selfishness, indifferent love of country, and idleness and negligence 
on the part of the citizens, that it may judge the first signs of cor- 
ruption and of evil example, using moral penalties to correct viola- 
tions of customs, even as criminals are punished by corporal penal- 
ties. Such action should be taken not only against that which 
conflicts with customs, but also against that which mocks them; 
not only against that which attacks them, but against that which 
weakens them; not only against that which violates the Constitution, 
but also against that which outrages public decency. The jurisdiction 
of this truly sacred tribunal should be effective with respect to educa- 
tion and enlightenment, but advisory only with regard to penalties 
and punishments. But its annals or registers containing its acts and 
deliberations, which will, in effect, record the ethical precepts and the 
actions of citizens, should be the public books of virtue and vice. 
These books would be consulted [for guidance] by the people in 
elections, by the magistrates in their decisions, and by the judges in 
rendering verdicts. Such an institution, chimerical as it may appear, 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


193 

is infinitely more feasible than others which certain ancient and 
modern legislators have established with less benefit to mankind. 

Legislators I In the plan of a constitution that I most respectfully 
submit to your better wisdom, you will observe the spirit in which 
it was conceived. In proposing to you a division of citizens into 
active and passive groups, I have endeavored to promote the national 
prosperity by means of the two greatest levers of industry: work and 
knowledge. By activating these two powerful mainsprings of society, 
we can achieve the most difficult of accomplishments among men— 
that of making them honest and happy. By setting just and pru- 
dent restrictions upon the primary and electoral assemblies, we can 
put the first check on popular license, thereby avoiding the blind, 
clamorous conventions that have in all times placed the stamp of 
error on elections, an error that consequendy carries over to the 
magistrates and in turn to the conduct of the government; for the 
initial act of election is the one by which a people creates either 
liberty or slavery. 

By augmenting Congress' weight in the balance of powers through 
an increase in the number of legislators and a change in the character 
of the Senate, I have endeavored to provide this first legislative body 
in the nation with a firm basis and to endow it with an eminence 
that will better insure the fulfillment of its sovereign functions. 

In separating the executive jurisdiction from that of the legislature 
by means of well-defined boundaries, it is my intention not to divide 
but rather to unite these supreme powers through those bonds that 
are bom of independence, for any prolonged conflict between these 
powers has never failed to destroy one of the contenders. In seeking 
to vest in the executive authority a sum total of powers greater than 
that which it previously enjoyed, I have no desire to grant a despot 
the authority to tyrannize the Republic, but I do wish to prevent 
deliberative despotism from being the immediate source of a vicious 
circle of despotic situations, in which anarchy alternates with oli- 
garchy and monocracy. In requesting tenure for judges and the 
establishment of juries and a new code of law, I have asked the 
Congress to guarantee civil liberty, the most precious, the most just, 
the most necessary, in a word, the only liberty, since without it the 
others are nothing. I have solicited the correction of the most lamen- 
table abuses in our judiciary. These abuses had their vicious origin 
in that welter of Spanish legislation which, like time itself, was col- 
lected from all ages and from all men, whether the works of the 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


194 

sane or of the demented, whether the creations of brilliant or of 
extravagant minds, and whether gathered from monuments of 
human thought or of human caprice. This judicial compendium, a 
monster of ten thousand heads, which, to this day, has been the 
curse of the Spanish peoples, is the most subtle punishment that 
the wrath of Heaven could have inflicted upon this unfortunate 
empire. 

After meditating upon the most effective means of regenerating 
the characteristics and customs bred in us by tyranny and war, I 
have dared to devise a moral power, drawn from the depths of re- 
mote antiquity and specifically from those forgotten laws that long 
maintained qualities of virtue among the Greeks and Romans. It 
may well be looked upon as sheer delirium, but it is not an impos- 
sibility, and I flatter myself that you may not wholly reject an idea 
which, if perfected by experience and learning, may prove to be 
very effective. 

Horrified by the disagreement that has reigned and will continue 
to reign among us owing to the subtle nature which characterizes the 
federal government, I am impelled to request that you adopt a cen- 
tral form of government, uniting all the states of Venezuela into a 
republic, one and indivisible. This measure, which I regard as urgent, 
vital, and redeeming is of such a nature that, unless it is adopted, 
death will be the fruit of our rebirth. 

It is my duty, Legislators, to present you with a detailed and 
faithful picture of my political, civil, and military administration; 
but to do so would weary you and distract your valuable attention 
at this critical time when every moment is precious. Consequendy, 
the secretaries of state will report to Congress on their respective de- 
partments, submitting at the same time the documents and records 
that will serve as supporting data in order that you may gain an exact 
picture of the true and positive state of the Republic. 

I would not dwell upon the most notable acts of my command 
did they not concern the majority of Venezuelans. I refer, Gentlemen, 
to the more important resolutions of this most recent period. The 
dark mantle of barbarous and profane slavery covered the Venezue- 
lan earth, and our sky was heavy with stormy clouds, which threat- 
ened to rain a deluge of fire. I implored the protection of the God 
of Humanity, and redemption soon dispersed the tempests. Slavery 
broke its fetters, and Venezuela was filled with new sons, grateful 
sons who have forged the instruments of their captivity into weapons 
of freedom. Yes, those who once were slaves are now free: those who 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


195 

once were the embittered enemies of a stepmother are now the proud 
defenders of their own country. To describe the justice, the necessity, 
and the beneficent results of this measure would be superfluous, for 
you know the history of the Helots, of Spartaco, and of Haiti; and be- 
cause you know that one cannot be both free and enslaved at the 
same time, without simultaneously violating every natural, political, 
and civil law, I leave to your sovereign decision the reform or the 
repeal of all my statutes and decrees; but I plead for the confirmation 
of the absolute freedom of the slaves, as I would plead for my very 
life and for the life of the Republic. 

To recount for you the military history of Venezuela would be to 
recall the history of republican heroism among the ancients; it 
would but point out to you that Venezuela has her place in the 
great record of sacrifices made on the altar of liberty. Nothing could 
fill the noble breasts of our generous warriors except the sublime 
honors that are granted to the benefactors of mankind. As they have 
fought neither for power, nor for fortune, nor even for glory, but 
for liberty alone, the title of Liberators of the Republic is their just 
reward. I, therefore, have founded a sacred society of these illustrious 
men and created the Order of the Liberators of Venezuela. Legisla- 
tors! Yours is the power to grant honors and decorations; it is your 
duty to carry out this august act of national gratitude. 

Men who have given up all the pleasures and possessions that they 
have acquired by their diligence and talents; men who have experi- 
enced every cruelty of a horrible war and who have suffered the 
bitterest privations and the severest torments; men so well-deserv- 
ing of the nation demand the attention of the government; there- 
fore, I have ordered them to be compensated out of the public 
domain. If I have earned any merit whatsoever in the eyes of the 
people, I ask their representatives simply to heed my petition as 
reward for my humble services. Let the Congress order the distri- 
bution of the national property pursuant to the law 1 which I, in 
the name of the Republic, have decreed in behalf of the soldiers of 
Venezuela. 

Now, after endless victories, we have succeeded in annihilating the 
Spanish hosts. The court of Madrid has desperately and vainly en- 
deavored to play upon the conscience of the magnanimous sovereigns 
who have just rid Europe of usurpation and tyranny, and who are 
certain to support the legality and justice of the American cause. In- 


a This public domain or national property consisted largely of land and 
dwellings taken from the royalist sympathizers (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


I96 

capable of obtaining our submission by force of arms, Spain has 
reverted to her insidious policy; unable to conquer us, she desires 
to employ her techniques in creating suspicion. Ferdinand has so 
humbled himself as to confess that he needs foreign aid in order to 
return us to his ignominious yoke— a yoke that all the force in the 
world cannot impose! Venezuela, convinced that she possesses suffi- 
cient strength to repel her oppressors, has announced, through her 
government, her absolute determination to fight unto the death in de- 
fense of her political existence, not only against Spain but against all 
men, were all men to degrade themselves by coming to the aid of a 
rapacious government whose only mobile weapons are the sword of 
extermination and the flames of the Inquisition— a government that 
today does not seek dominions, but deserts; not cities, but ruins; not 
vassals, but tombs. The Declaration of [Independence of] the Re- 
public of Venezuela is a most glorious act, a most heroic act, one 
most worthy of a free people. It is the one act which, with the great- 
est satisfaction, I have the honor to submit to the Congress, as it has 
been sanctioned by the unanimous expression of the free people of 
Venezuela. 

During the second period of the Republic our army lacked mili- 
tary supplies; always unarmed and without munitions, it was poorly 
equipped. But now the soldiers who defend our independence are 
armed not only with justice but also with might. Our troops are com- 
parable to the best in Europe, as there is no inequality in weapons of 
destruction. These great advantages we owe to the unbounded 
liberality of certain generous-hearted foreigners who, having heard 
the pitiful cries of humanity, were moved by the cause of righteous- 
ness. These foreigners did not view these events as idle spectators; 
they hastened to supply their aid and assistance. To guarantee the 
triumph of their philanthropic principles, they provided the Republic 
with whatever it needed. These friends of humanity have been the 
guardian angels of America, and we owe them an eternal debt of 
gratitude as well as the religious fulfillment of the sacred obligations 
that we have contracted with them. Our national debt, Legislators, 
is the repository of Venezuelan faith, honor, and gratitude. Respect 
it as the Holy Covenant that contains not only the claims of our 
benefactors but also the glory of our honor. Let us perish rather than 
break a pledge that has saved our country and the life of her sons. 

The reuniting 1 of New Granada and Venezuela into one great 

1 Reunion. The republican areas of Venezuela and Colombia were once 
united politically in the colonial era. Bolivar’s persistent reference to past 
history demands the above translation, although union is implied (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


197 

state has been the constant wish of the peoples and governments of 
these republics. The fortunes of war have effected this merger so 
earnestly desired by all Colombians: in fact, we are now a single state. 
These brother peoples have already entrusted to you their interests, 
their rights, and their destinies. 

As I contemplate the reunion of this territory, my soul ascends 
to the heights necessary to view the mighty panorama afforded by 
this astounding picture. My imagination, taking flight to the ages 
to come, is captured by the vision of future centuries, and when, 
from that vantage point, I observe with admiration and amazement 
the prosperity, the splendor, the fullness of life which will then 
flourish in this vast region, I am overwhelmed. I seem to behold my 
country as the very heart of the universe, its far-flung shores spread- 
ing between those oceans which Nature kept apart but which our 
country will have joined by an imposing system of extensive canals. 
I can see her serving as the bond, the center, and the emporium of 
the human race. I behold her shipping to all corners of the earth the 
treasures of silver and gold which lie hidden in her mountains. I 
can see her dispensing, by means of her divine plants, health and 
life to the ailing of the Old World. I can see her confiding her 
precious secret s to the learned men who do not know that her store 
of knowledge is superior to the wealth with which Nature has 
prodigally endowed her. I can see her crowned by glory, seated upon 
the throne of liberty with the sceptre of Justice in her hand, disclos- 
ing to the Old World the majesty of the New. 

I pray you, Legislators, receive with indulgence this profession of 
my political faith, these innermost yearnings of my heart, these 
fervent pleas, which, on behalf of the people, I venture to place 
before you. I pray you, grant to Venezuela a government preemi- 
nently popular, preeminently just, preeminendy moral; one that 
will suppress anarchy, oppression, and guilt— a government that will 
usher in the reign of innocence, humanity, and peace; a government 
wherein the rule of inexorable law will signify the triumph of 
equality and freedom. 

Gentlemen : you may begin your labors, I have finished mine. 

Bolivar 


*9^ SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

71. Guillermo White, Merchant of Trinidad 
[Larrazdbal, Vida de Bolivar, I, 574 and 576] 

Laguna de los Laureles, April 4, 1819. 

Mr. Guillermo White: 

Our defensive has proved too much for Morillo; what with 
marches, countermarches, and local engagements, he has lost nearly 
half his army. I might have attacked him head-on in a major battle 
and been all but sure of the outcome; but I have had to curb my bold- 
ness and avoid the encounter, deferring to the oft-repeated counsels 
of all our friends, who do not care to risk the fate of the Republic in 
one general action. On the other hand, the defeat of our enemies is 
assured if we continue to watch and harass them repeatedly until Gen- 
eral Urdanetas expedition can divert their attention to the rear. They 
will, then, either have to divide their forces or allow one of our 
armies to advance into the territory that they abandon. We shall 
thereby augment our forces while theirs diminish through the inevita- 
ble desertions from their ranks and the depletion of their resources. 
Morillo can expect nothing from Spain, whereas we are not without 
hopes of British assistance. Everything, therefore, counsels me to 
adopt the tactics of Fabius, whose conduct, to my regret, I am obliged 
to imitate. Unfortunately, I cannot begin to match the character of 
that great Roman general : he was prudent, and I am impetuous. 

The day before yesterday, General Paez scored a brilliant victory 
over Morillo. It might have been completely decisive if darkness had 
not hidden the enemy from our lancers. Our intention had been 
merely to demonstrate to hdorillo the superiority of our cavalry; 
hence we did not take advantage of our splendid victory, as we had 
not prepared the sally to that end. We routed the whole army, 
whereas we had only hoped to defeat a part of his cavalry. The 
hundred and fifty valiant men commanded by General Paez could 
not alone have destroyed the entire army, for our troops were on the 
other side of the Arauca. 


Bolivar 




SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


199 


72. To [Francisco Antonio Zea], Vice President of Venezuela 
[Letterbook] 

Guasdualito, June 3, 1819. The 9th [year]. 

In executing the plan 1 communicated to Your Excellency in my 
official letter of the 26th of last month, the entire army marched on 
the 27th and arrived here today. 

Although the project announced to Your Excellency is simple as 
to form, I have modified the operations to better insure the outcome. 
Instead of going to Cucuta, I am proceeding to Casanare with the 
infantry. After uniting there with General Santander, I shall occupy 
Chita, which is the best approach to New Granada. Meanwhile, 
General Paez, with a column of cavalry, will take the valleys of 
Cucuta, thus diverting the attention of the enemy to that area, which 
will greatly facilitate the operation, as it will force the enemy either 
to concentrate his forces in Sogamoso or to divide them to cover all 
approaches. If he adopts the former tactic, he will abandon to us the 
provinces of Pamplona and Socorro and parts of the provinces of 
Santa Marta and Tunja. If he chooses the latter course, we shall fight 
him to better advantage and with greater certainty of success. 

Whatever plan the enemy may adopt, I shall remain in command 
of the entire combined army when we penetrate the interior of New 
Granada. General Paez will return to continue in command of this 
province and the troops which defend it. 

The major part of our cavalry will remain here and will operate in 
two divisions. One, under General Torres, is to be based at San Fer- 
nando and will defend the Apure from Nutrias to the Orinoco. The 
other, commanded by Colonel Aramendi, will march tomorrow to- 
ward Barinas to make incursions against the enemy in order to dis- 
tract him and thereby gain every possible advantage. 

When General Paez returns from Cucuta with the troops which 
accompany him, he will combine all these forces and direct them as 
the situation may require. As his absence cannot extend beyond fif- 
teen or twenty days at the most, Your Excellency will communicate 
to him any matter which you desire to make known to the Army of 
the West. 

In my communication of the 26th, I neglected to mention that it 
would be highly desirable if Your Excellency and the President of 
the Congress were to urge General MacGregor to hasten the plans 


1 To free New Granada after crossing the Andes (ed.). 


200 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


for his expedition, and to launch it against the coast of Santa Marta 
as soon as possible in order that it may coincide with my operations 
inland. This operation will immeasurably speed New Granada’s com- 
plete liberation, guarantee the success of both enterprises, and place 
the Spaniards in great embarrassment as to where to concentrate their 
efforts, as they lack sufficient troops to meet either of the attacks. A 
vessel should be dispatched for the sole purpose of delivering this 
order, with instructions to seek General MacGregor and place it in 
his hands personally. 

Fearing that my letter of the 26th may have been lost, I herewith 
include a duplicate of the communication addressed to Your Excel- 
lency under that date. It is now very late, and tomorrow I must march 
to cross the Arauca, so there is no time to duplicate the orders for 
Generals Marino, Bermudez, Urdaneta, Sedeno, Monagas, Zaraza, 
Arismendi, and Admiral Bri6n. Your Excellency will transcribe for 
them the articles which pertain to each of them in the event the com- 
munication in which I did so has been lost. God keep, etc. 


73. To General Francisco de Paula Santander 
[Letterbook] 

Arauca, June 5, 1819. The 9th [year]. 

Upon crossing the Arauca yesterday, I had the pleasure of receiv- 
ing your two official letters of the 27th ultimo, the one enclosing a 
copy of the document attesting the solemn recognition of the govern- 
ment of Venezuela by yourself and the troops under your command 
and the other in reply to my order of the 20th. 

I assume that Colonel Lara has already acquainted you with the 
plan of operations which I outlined in that order. In execution of 
that plan, the major part of the army has now crossed the Arauca, 
and I have left General P&ez in a position to move upon Cucuta. I 
shall leave here today with the army and will join you within seven 
or eight days. I shall probably march my men the faster, the sooner 
to have that pleasure. 

I hope to find you in complete readiness to move, and I trust that 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


201 


you will have overlooked none of the arrangements needed to provide 
adequate transport for the ordnance and also all available horses for 
remounts, for those the army possesses will hardly hold out as far as 
your headquarters. 

May God, etc. 


74. To [Francisco Antonio Zea], Vice President of Venezuela 
[Correo del Orinoco , August 21, 1819] 

General Headquarters, Paya, June 30, 1819. The 9th [year]. 
To His Excellency the Vice President: 

Since Guasdualito, where I had the pleasure of writing to Your 
Excellency, nothing new of importance has occurred in the army. 
Our operations were confined to marching through friendly territory 
until the 27th of this month when our advanced guard attacked an 
enemy detachment of three hundred men stationed here. This inci- 
dent was the beginning of the campaign of New Granada, and, if 
early successes may presage the outcome of an enterprise, ours will 
indeed be successful. Three hundred of the enemy's finest infantry 
were dislodged from this position which, due to its location, is so 
strong that a hundred men might suffice to keep ten thousand in 
check. The only advantage which resulted from our victory was the 
occupation of this post. We were unable to pursue the enemy, as 
they crossed and destroyed the bridge over the Paya River which can- 
not be forded. We took the small stock of provisions that they had 
abandoned and killed a few of their men. 

But it was not this victory that most gratified the men or cost us 
the greatest effort. The principal difficulty we overcame was that pre- 
sented by the road. For an entire month we marched through the 
province of Casanare, each day surmounting new obstacles which ap- 
peared to increase the farther we advanced. It is a marvel of good for- 
tune that the army arrived here without mishap, for we crossed a 
multitude of navigable streams which had flooded a large part of our 
route through the llanos . This route, I believe, will prove to have 


202 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


been the main hazard of the march. And, now that it is past, the re- 
mainder appears insignificant, as I have met with obstacles which 
only the most unflinching determination could overcome. The rug- 
gedness of the mountains we traversed would be inconceivable to 
anyone who has not travelled that route. To convey some idea, suf- 
fice it to say that in four marches we rendered useless nearly all the 
ordnance transport and lost all our reserve animals. The rigors of the 
season also helped make the passage difficult. There was scarcely a 
day or a night when it did not rain. Now at last, though we have not 
concluded the march, we may flatter ourselves that the most difficult 
part is over and that we are approaching the end. Within a week at 
most, I shall be in Sogamoso and I hope that our situation will be 
much improved by then. All the reports we receive from New Gra- 
nada confirm and support our hopes. They unanimously affirm that 
large numbers of guerrillas in the interior harass the enemy unremit- 
tingly; that the enemy fears us, whereas the people anxiously await 
our arrival; that General MacGregor is actually threatening the coast, 
where he is even said to have landed. If these reports are confirmed, 
we may be sure of the early and glorious termination of our campaign. 
Nothing can stand in our way if we have the love of the people; 
moreover, the forces of the enemy do not suffice to hold the country- 
side. 

From General Paez, under date of the 15 th instant, I learn that he 
has subdued the faction in Guaca; he has burned their ranches and 
destroyed the crops they lived on. He plans to march on Pedraza in 
pursuit of an enemy division of seven hundred men which has ad- 
vanced that far, and he promises a complete victory if he has the good 
fortune to encounter it. 

I have had no news of Your Excellency or of affairs in the eastern 
[provinces] since May 1, the date of my last communication from 
Your Excellency. God keep Your Excellency for many years. 

Bolivar 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


203 


75. To [Francisco Antonio Zea], Vice President of Venezuela 
[Letterbook] 

Tasco, July 13, 1819. The 9th [year]. 

From the bulletin which I am pleased to enclose, Your Excellency 
will note the operations and progress of the army. The difficulties, 
described in my last communication to Your Excellency, which our 
forces experienced on the road to Paya, appear to multiply with each 
days further advance. I was obliged to divide the army to facilitate 
its movements. Generals Anzoategui and Santander continued the 
march by way of Pisba, while General Soublette remained [tempo- 
rarily] at Paya with the British column and part of our cavalry to 
guard the ordnance and all our baggage. The first two divisions ar- 
rived at Socha so fatigued from the march and so weakened by the 
changes in climate that nothing decisive can be undertaken until 
they recover. Further, the slow pace forced upon General Soublette 
by the character of the road, the type of troops under his command, 
and, above all, by the baggage trains, has delayed his reunion with 
the army longer than I anticipated. His tardiness has compelled me 
to suspend operations. These are the reasons for my long delay in 
seeking out the enemy and for my decision to divert him by indeci- 
sive feints and threats intended only to check him until our forces 
have been reunited and our cavalry furnished with fresh mounts. I 
hear from General Soublette that he was going to cross the paramo 1 
yesterday, in which case he should be able to rejoin me within two 
days. 

The three engagements that we have sustained to date have ended 
in our favor. In each instance, our troops of both branches, infantry 
and cavalry, proved much superior in discipline and valor to those of 
the enemy who, though he confronts us only from the strongest of 
positions, has been defeated in every encounter. 

At the outset of the campaign, we had the good fortune to inter- 
cept three enemy couriers, and I enclose those dispatches that appear 
most important. These have informed me of the enemy’s plans, 
forces, positions, and even his hopes. The Spaniards fear not only the 
army but the people, who prove themselves gready devoted to the 
cause of liberty. Many persons, living far from my center of opera- 
tions, have come to offer all that they possess for the use of the army; 
and the populations we encounter en route receive us with a thou- 


1 Mountainous, windswept plateau area (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


204 

sand demonstrations of joy. All eagerly look to our success and gener- 
ously give us whatever might help bring victory. The vexations that 
they have suffered at the hands of the Spaniards have produced their 
natural results— hatred in general— and all cry vengeance to the death. 
This fortunate disposition on the part of the people and the superior- 
ity of our troops convince me that victory is all but certain. 

On the 9th instant, I received Your Excellency's communications, 
dated May 23, enclosing two dispatches from General Urdaneta and 
one from the Admiral [Brion]. I am quite surprised that at that time 
Your Excellency had not received my dispatches of May 6 and 9, 
which I forwarded from El Caujaral with urgent instructions that 
they be delivered with all speed to Margarita. Fortunately, General 
Urdaneta s reports have led me to hope that the expedition was not be- 
gun in May and that, although my orders may have been long de- 
layed, they will yet arrive in time. 

Let me most emphatically repeat to Your Excellency my previous 
order that I receive at the earliest possible moment the supplies of 
arms and munitions which I requested from Mantecal and Guasdua- 
lito. Above all, it is vital that General Urdaneta be charged with 
bringing them, since he will spare no effort to do so; moreover, our 
army has need of his services. 

While neither Your Excellency nor General Marino tells me any- 
thing about the strength of the Army of the East, I have been pleased 
to learn from General Sedeno that his force is now quite respectable, 
even without the Cumana division which was about to join him. I 
assume that Your Excellency and General Bermudez have endeavored 
to carry out the orders that I issued for the organization of that army, 
in which case I have nothing to fear from that quarter, and, further, 
I can rest assured that Morillo will be unable to withdraw from Vene- 
zuela a body of troops sufficient to relieve New Granada without los- 
ing all the territory he now holds there. Your Excellency must urge 
the most exact observance of my orders upon the Commanding Gen- 
eral of the Army of the East and see that they are carried out. God 
keep, etc. 






SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


205 


76. To Francisco Antonio Zea, Vice President of Venezuela 
[O’Leary, XVI, 432] 

Bogota, August 14, 1819. 

Since conceiving the plan of advancing the date of my march into 
the interior of this kingdom, 1 I have learned that a consuming fear 
might set in motion all the resources of the minions of Spain. This 
thought, based upon my observations and experience, was in truth 
confirmed when, throughout those states supporting the Viceroy Juan 
Samano, I found that a superior force, well organized and disciplined, 
had formed a wall against which it was hoped that the valiant Army 
of Liberation would hurl itself to bits. 

I calculated, however, that the spectre of all the ills with which 
these peoples had been and still were afflicted, would have prepared 
their minds to welcome with joy their heroic defenders. And, indeed, 
I had scarcely taken my first steps on this side of the cordillera which 
divides the llano from the broken ground adjoining the province of 
Casanare, when I heard, resounding before me, the benedictions of 
men who, in the full fervor of freedom, waited for my forces to 
remedy the calamities and abuses that had driven them to the utmost 
limits of endurance. 

The first to face me on the field of battle was a veteran commander 
at the head of an army of from 4,000 to 5,000 combat troops. The 
commander of this army, General Jos6 Maria Barreiro, outdid himself 
in valor at every turn, forcing from me actions which lifted the Re- 
public to new heights of glory. 

The discipline of his troops, their excellent organization, the favora- 
ble positions he occupied, and the number of recourses he had pre- 
pared, convinced me that this enterprise alone was indeed worthy of 
the courage and daring of the soldiers of the Republic. 

Boyacd, our most complete victory, which we have just gained, has 
decided the fate of the inhabitants of these regions. After destroying 
every branch of the King’s army, I moved rapidly to this capital, at- 
tended by great numbers of men who vied with each other in their 
expressions of tenderest gratitude, and who, falling upon the scat- 
tered remnants of the enemy, cooperated actively in his final rout; 
themselves unarmed, they seized the enemy’s arms and took a large 
number of prisoners. Your Excellency will find the details of this vic- 
tory in the papers which I herein enclose. 


1 New Granada (ed.). 


206 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


My emotions have been stirred not a little by my arrival in this 
capital of New Granada where the marks of depredation and cruelty 
left by the converts of the Peninsula can still be seen. 

The Viceroy Samano, together with all the officials, the majority of 
the Spaniards, and such forces as remained to him, left precipitously, 
fleeing at the first news of our latest victory. Before my arrival in this 
capital, I ordered a few divisions to march south and west of here, 
which is the route that they have taken, in the reasonable hope of 
overtaking them and a large group of refugees. 

Notwithstanding the general devastation that this kingdom has 
suffered, the Republic can expect a million 'pesos metdlico in addition 
to the considerable sum to be realized from the properties of fleeing 
opponents and dissatisfied fugitives. 

I am actively at work, arranging the domestic economy. The friend- 
liness of these peoples, among whom scarcely an enemy is to be 
found, makes me predict that the power of the tyrants will be re- 
duced to nought. 

My warmest congratulations to Your Excellency and to the Re- 
public, with the sincere good wishes of the splendid people of New 
Granada, whose only desire is to share a common felicity with the 
people of Venezuela. Please offer also the triumphs of the arms under 
my command to the Supreme Congress as a tribute of my allegiance. 

God keep Your Excellency for many years. 

Bolivar 


77. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander 
[O’Leary, XVI, 472] 

Puente Real, September 26, 1819. 

In six days, I have moved here from Santa Fe [de Bogota]. I was 
obliged to take more time than I intended in some places in order to 
satisfy the insistent demands of the populace. I may say that, since 
my departure, my journey here has been one of constant triumph. 
There is no testimonial of gratitude, love, and confidence that these 
people, with the most cordial and sincere expressions of gladness, 
have not lavished upon me. Everywhere along the road, enthusiastic 
crowds have obstructed my path. Mothers, who have already given 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


207 

their sons to their country, have proffered others so naturally and 
spontaneously that I prize their actions above more costly favors. The 
triumphal arches, the flowers, the hymns, the acclamations, the 
wreaths offered and placed upon my head by the hands of lovely 
maidens, the fiestas, and the thousand demonstrations of joy are the 
least of the gifts that I have received. The greatest and dearest to 
my heart are the tears, mingled with the rapture of happiness, in 
which I have been bathed and the embraces with which the multi- 
tude have all but crushed me. 

This town of Tunja is heroic; here the emotional reaction has been 
in proportion to the terrible three years of oppression. The secular 
and regular clergy, the nunneries, the local dignitaries, the old men, 
the children, the poor, the women, and even the dying have sur- 
rounded me and freely opened their hearts to me. In none of this 
have I found the language of flattery but only the expression of can- 
dor and appreciation for the blessings of freedom. Among this people, 
with their unfeigned enthusiasm for their rights, I see the fires of pa- 
triotism in which I think the freedom of these provinces will be 
forged. 

The Military Governor of Tunja daily proves himself more deserv- 
ing of my esteem and confidence. The people under his command 
may firmly rely upon his virtues. 

Tomorrow, I proceed through Wlez to Socorro. I desire the happi- 
ness and tranquility of these peoples and the health and pleasure of 
Your Excellency. 

God keep Your Excellency for many years. 

Bolivar 


78. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander 
[ Original ] 

Pamplona, November 1, 1819. 

Dear General: 

Today I received your letter of October 20, in which you give me 
such good news concerning the ordnance, and of Casanare, Popayan, 
Paris, Ascanio, and of other less important matters. 

I deeply regret that the India mine suffers interruptions and that 


208 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


the godos are robbing us of the Veta mine. I know very well that 
nothing is being produced for the state, but it is necessary that you 
begin to act on these matters. 

For many days, I have been intending to reply to your remarks 
concerning my orders respecting loans, tithes, and contributions. You 
must do me the justice of assuming that none of the observations you 
lay before me have escaped my attention. They are obvious and gen- 
eral. You must further do me the justice of assuming that, when I 
employ similar measures, it is because I consider them to be of ur- 
gent necessity. Extreme measures, though perilous, are indispensa- 
ble in sustaining an enterprise lacking in resources. Do but recall the 
violent expedients I have had to adopt to gain the few successes that 
have kept us alive. In order to save four guerrillas who had con- 
tributed to our liberation, we were compelled to declare the war to 
the death; to gain a few faithful followers, we had to emancipate the 
slaves; to recruit the two armies of last year and this, we had to resort 
to the terror of martial law, and to obtain the 170,000 pesos which are 
now coming to Guayana, we have asked and taken whatever public 
or private funds were within our reach. 

Review all this, and you will see that it amounts to nothing. To 
achieve this nothing, we have been obliged to employ our every fac- 
ulty; for it is a general rule that, in an ill-constructed machine, the 
engine must be enormously powerful to produce the slightest result. 
Experience has taught me that much must be demanded of men in 
order that they may accomplish little. Possibly this maxim is not in- 
variable but, if I do not trust experience, what shall I trust? 

These considerations are my reply to what you have so sensibly 
and so sagely urged. More, my friend, and not better, is what always 
counts most. The Christians with their Gospel were beaten by the 
Turks with their Koran. 

I am momentarily expecting a detail of scouts whom I sent to re- 
connoiter the enemy, of whom nothing positive is known. I have 
merely been informed that he is at Tariba and San Cristobal and that 
he has received reinforcements. Our commanders complain bitterly 
of the attitude of the people from Cucuta to La Grita, and they at- 
tribute this attitude to our present ignorance of the enemy. This ig- 
norance may cause us great harm. 

You will have seen the letter from General Paez; this is all I have 
received from Venezuela. Thanks can be extended to those in com- 
mand there for the good service they render their country and govern- 
ment. However, I am as uninformed as a person born blind; conse- 
quently, I am working in obscurity. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


209 

Today, I ordered four companies of recruits to Soatd with such 
supplies as were here, and today I expect the muskets. We are greatly 
in need of armaments. General Soublette has left only useless muskets 
—all utterly useless. I gready fear that, in these three provinces, we 
shall not collect even 1,200 muskets which are in condition for firing. 
I have sent 280 to Tunja to be repaired, as we have no means of do- 
ing so here for lack of files and other things, primarily because they 
are of a complicated manufacture, and most of them lack either locks 
or stocks. 

We are also badly in need of money, not to mention food supplies, 
which now must be purchased at a considerable distance. I have sent 
70,000 pesos with Padron for Salina; 12,000 pesos having come from 
Santa Fe, 6,000 from Tunja, 26,000 from Socorro, 7,000 in levies 
from Gir6n, and the remainder from this province. The unmilled sil- 
ver coin [plata macuquina ] which I ordered brought here, I am now 
returning to you, as it did not pass, for it is not accepted here. But I 
trust you will replace it in order to provide for this army, which will 
increase enormously in numbers; for I have heard it said that it takes 
people to make a war, and this Boves proved to me, at my expense. 

Good-bye, my friend. 

BOLIVAR 


79. To Luis Bri6n, Admiral of the Venezuelan Navy 
[Copy] 

Angostura, December 14, 1819. 

My dear Admiral : 

I am back in Venezuela with the satisfaction of having liberated, 
within three months, twelve provinces of New Granada, which are 
perfecdy tranquil, secure, and well-garrisoned. I shall now concern 
myself with Venezuela, whose fate appears to have been determined; 
for, with the resources that New Granada has given me in men and 
money, I have raised an army that is far superior to any which Morillo 
can gather to oppose me. Furthermore, the morale of the troops of the 
Republic is far superior to that of the King's army which was de- 
feated and captured at Boyacd. The consequences of that battle are 


210 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


incalculable and, in my opinion, they have insured the foundations 
of liberty for both states. 

Colonel Montilla is going to your island to undertake a mission of 
great consequence and importance to the realization of my plan of 
operations in the forthcoming campaign. 1 Energy and promptness are 
the principle elements required for this enterprise; without them, my 
plan will fail, my purposes will be frustrated, and we shall suffer de- 
lays harmful and disastrous to liberty, to you, and to all who have 
fought so long to achieve independence. 

The squadron under your command is, on this occasion, more es- 
sential than ever. The governments ships, your vessels, the privateers, 
every ship that you deem necessary must be used in this operation. 
Montilla will advise you on means of subsistance and everything else, 
as he has full orders and instructions. 

Should you think it best that you remain on the Island, let General 
Clemente command the squadron; but you must, from the moment 
of Montillas arrival, unleash your indefatigable energy, especially 
in a matter of such importance, because the squadron must be made 
ready quickly, very quickly. Your presence there makes me as confi- 
dent as if I were there myself. You must overcome all difficulties. 

I am very pleased to be able to assure you that within three months 
you will have at your disposal 25,000 pesos, and a total of 100,000 
during the coming year; for, of the million duros that I have ordered 
sent from Santa Fe, I am setting aside one portion to discharge at 
least two-thirds of the amount owed you, and if, as I hope, Caracas is 
taken, I shall have the pleasure of seeing you paid in full. My dear 
Admiral, I am, as always, your devoted friend, 

Bolivar 

1 This plan was successfully completed with the taking of the provinces of 
Santa Marta and Cartagena in 1820 and 1821, following an unsuccessful 
expedition in the Rio Hacha region (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


21 1 


80. Message to the Congress of Angostura 
[Correo del Orinoco, December 18, 1819] 

Angostura, December 14, 1819. 
Gentlemen of the Legislative Assembly: 

On entering these august precincts, my first sentiment is one of 
gratitude for the high honor that the Congress has deigned to grant 
me, permitting me again to occupy this seat which but a year ago I 
yielded to the President of the representatives of the people. 

When, although contrary to my strongest convictions, and un- 
merited, the executive power was entrusted to me at the beginning of 
this year, I protested to this sovereign body that my profession, my 
character, and my talents were incompatible with the duties of a 
magistrate. On being relieved of these duties, I left their performance 
to the Vice President and took for myself the responsibility of directing 
the war only. I at once joined the Army of the West which was then 
confronted by General Morillo with a superior force. Nothing would 
have been more foolhardy than for us to have given battle under 
conditions that were certain to result in the occupation of Caracas 
by an expeditionary force newly arrived from Europe, and at a time 
when we were awaiting fresh auxiliaries. As winter approached, 
General Morillo abandoned the plains of the Apure; therefore, I 
judged that greater advantages would accrue to the Republic from 
the liberation of New Granada than from completing that of Vene- 
zuela. 

It would be far too tedious to describe in detail to the Congress 
the labors performed by the troops of the Army of Liberation in ac- 
complishing the task which we had assigned ourselves. The winter 
on the flooded plains, the frozen peaks of the Andes, the sudden 
changes of climate, an army twice inured to war and in control of 
the best military positions of South America— these and many other 
obstacles we managed to overcome at Paya, Gameza, Vargas, Boyaca, 
and Popayan, in order to liberate, in less than three months, twelve 
provinces of New Granada. 

I commend to the national sovereign body the merit of these great 
services on the part of my indomitable comrades-in-arms who, with un- 
exampled perseverance, suffered mortal privations, and, with a valor 
unequalled in the annals of Venezuela, defeated and captured the 
army of the King. But not alone to the Army of Liberation do we owe 


212 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

the advantages which we have gained. The people of New Granada 
have proved themselves worthy to be free. Their unfailing coopera- 
tion repaired our losses and swelled our ranks. The delirium of an 
uncontrolled passion is less ardent than the joy felt by New Granada 
upon recovering her freedom. 

Those generous people have placed all their possessions and their 
very lives upon the altars of their country. These sacrifices are the 
more meritorious because they are voluntary. Yes, their unanimous 
determination to die free rather than live enslaved has given New 
Granada the right to our admiration and respect. Her desire for the 
reunion of her provinces with those of Venezuela is also unanimous. 
The Granadans are keenly aware of the tremendous advantage that 
would flow to both peoples from the creation of a new republic com- 
prising these two nations. The reunion of New Granada and Vene- 
zuela has been my sole aim since I first took up arms: it is the wish 
of the citizens of both countries, and it will be the guarantee of free- 
dom for South America. 

Legislators! The time has come to lay a firm and enduring founda- 
tion for our Republic. It is for your wisdom to decree this great char- 
ter of union and to lay down the principles and terms of the pact 
upon which this vast Republic shall be founded. Proclaim it before 
the world, and my services will have been rewarded. 

, Bolivar 


81. To [General Francisco de Paula Santander], 

Vice President of Cundinamarca 1 

[Letterbook] 

Angostura, December 20, 1819. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

It is my pleasure to deliver to Your Excellency the Fundamental 

1 New Granada, including the province of Cundinamarca, Quito [modern 
Ecuador], and Venezuela, constituted the three major political regions, or de- 
partments, of the Republic of Colombia, which was created by the Funda- 
mental Law of December 17, 1819. This Republic is frequently incorrectly 
titled Grand or Great Colombia by United States writers to distinguish it 
from the present-day nation of the same name. Santander was elected Vice 
President of Cundinamarca by the Congress of Angostura, December 17, 
1819 (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


213 

Law of the Republic of Colombia, decreed by the Sovereign Con- 
gress. The law itself sets forth the powerful motives which have in- 
duced the Congress to put into effect at last the wishes of the citizens 
of both nations, uniting them in a single republic. The prospect af- 
forded by this memorable act is as immense as it is magnificent. 
Power, prosperity, greatness, stability will be the issue of this happy 
union. 

The unanimous vote of the deputies of Venezuela and New 
Granada, in determining the name, rank, and dignity by which our 
newborn republic shall be known to the world and the basis on 
which its political relations must be established, has laid the founda- 
tion for a solid and permanent edifice. 

While this provisional act has not been invested with all the proper 
formalities, and although not all the free provinces of Cundinamarca 
have had the opportunity to approve it, the incalculable advantages it 
offers and, above all, the impelling necessity of availing ourselves 
of the present attitude of the foreign powers have prevailed upon the 
representatives of Venezuela and New Granada to take a step which 
they deem necessary to the stability, permanence, and prosperity of 
Colombia. 

In ten years of struggle and travail that beggar description, in ten 
years of suffering almost beyond human endurance, we have wit- 
nessed the indifference with which all Europe and even our brothers 
of the north 1 have remained but passive spectators of our anguish. 
The multiplicity of American sovereign states that heretofore existed 
must be recognized as the first among the many causes of this 
indifference. 

The lack of unity and cohesion, the lack of harmony and agree- 
ment and, above all, the lack of resources necessarily brought about 
by the separation of the republics is, I repeat, the true cause of the 
small interest which our neighbors, as well as Europe have, until 
the present, taken in our fate. Sections, mere fragments which, 
though large in area, possess neither population nor resources, can- 
not inspire a feeling of interest or confidence in those who might 
desire to establish relations with them. 

The Republic of Colombia possesses all the means and resources 
necessary to maintain the rank and dignity to which she has been 
elevated and to inspire foreigners with the confidence and faith that 
she can protect them. These factors facilitate the securing of allies 


1 The citizens of the United States of America (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


214 

and the procuring of the aid that is necessary for the consolidation of 
Colombian independence. 

The wealth of Cundinamarca and of Venezuela, their population, 
and the favorable position of the latter with her Atlantic ports will 
give Colombia an importance that neither Venezuela nor New Gra- 
nada could have enjoyed if they had remained apart. 

Those who seek the true felicity and splendor of Colombia have 
contributed preponderantly to this union. They, convinced of the 
mutual benefits [that will follow], have devoted their strength, their 
intelligence, and their eloquence to effect it. Vice President Francisco 
Antonio Zea has the glory of having been the prime mover in de- 
signing this compact which promises numerous and great advantages. 

Zea, in fact, has been named envoy extraordinary from Colombia to 
the government at Washington, and he will later proceed to France 
where he is well known and greatly esteemed. 1 The object of his 
mission there will be to win friends for us, dispose that government 
in our favor, and obtain the instruments of war and whatsoever else 
he may deem useful to Colombia. The government places great 
hopes in the ability of its envoy who is sanguine of success, by virtue 
of the confidence and faith that are necessarily inspired by the re- 
sources and achievements of the Republic of Colombia. 

Our agents in London, Penal ver and Vergara, inform us that the 
sentiments of the people of Great Britain are most favorably disposed 
toward us, as are those of their government. They are not without 
hope of obtaining the loan of 3,000,000 duros , which is the object of 
their mission, although they found Real, the agent of New Granada 
at that court, imprisoned for a debt of 150,000 pesos , for whom they 
obtained a release under their bond and guaranty. They are urging 
the union of the two republics, in keeping with the attitude of Great 
Britain, and they report th^f our credit and name will be greatly 
enhanced by such action. 

The twofold resources and the consequent twofold credit that will 
be ours is but another of the compelling reasons which Congress has 
considered in advocating the union of the two nations. There is vir- 
tually no doubt but that we shall obtain the loan in view of the im- 
portance and security of the Republic of Colombia. 

The Fundamental Law of the Republic of Colombia is to be 
solemnly proclaimed to the people and to the armed forces, posted 


'Zea did not go to the United States; he spent most of his time, until his 
death, in London rather than in Paris (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 21 5 

in all the municipalities, and ratified in the department of Cundina- 
marca, as provided by the Congress. 

Upon Your Excellency devolves the glory of becoming the execu- 
tor of this decree, which endows your native land with a greatness and 
majesty that the most brilliant imagination cannot conceive; and you 
are to see that the peoples, the armies, the townships, and the 
municipalities observe and enforce it. 

As soon as the Congress has announced the regulations for the 
convocation of the representatives of Colombia in the town of Cucuta, 
I shall execute them. There, this act will be invested with all the 
solemnity, legality, and formality demanded by the governments 
through their legitimate representatives. 1 God keep, etc. 


82. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Cundinamarca 

[Original] 

Angostura, December 22, 1819. 

My dear friend: 

I came here as rapidly as possible and everything has turned out as 
I had hoped. Zea is Vice President of Colombia and the father of 
this Republic, for he has been its principal founder. I am making use 
of Arismendis services in the eastern provinces. Marino is sick here, 
but he will later march to the west where I had assigned him, al- 
though I am not sure what to do with this man. 

The day after tomorrow, I shall leave here, though it will be 
Christmas Eve and a holy festival day, but I do not intend to lose a 
moment, as the army is already on the march for the Apure and 
Paez is at the mercy of any contingency. The combined army will 
be immense, but we always lack something and now it is muskets; 
however, I expect to receive a large quantity of arms momentarily. 
I must have 10,000 guns in Cundinamarca or I shall go mad. I shall 
dispatch them before a month is out, in spite of all the world. I did 


1 See Doc. 121 (ed.). 


2l6 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


not find a single musket here because nothing had arrived from 
Margarita, thanks to the upsets that our arrangements commonly 
meet with; the D’Evereux division had taken those that were here. 
He should arrive at any moment with the rest of the 5,000 men 
whom he promised for this year; seven regiments had embarked by 
September and must by now have arrived at Margarita, but we do not 
know this for certain. 

Montilla is to command an expedition against Rio Hacha and Santa 
Marta sometime in February with 1,000, 2,000, or 3,000 men, and 
whatever else he has, for which he is taking 50,000 'pesos . Not all of 
this amount is in silver, as there is no more here. My baggage with 
the money that I collected in New Granada, which is coming in the 
custody of Quartermaster [ comisario ] Bremont and Anacleto, has not 
yet arrived. 

Zea is sure to obtain recognition for us in these highly favorable 
conditions owing to the nature of the situation and the character of 
the envoy. All this is certain and more than certain; for what I have 
stated above is not exaggeration— it is what is called the unvarnished 
truth, stated with the frankness vowed to you in all sincerity by 
your friend, 


BOLlVAR 


1820 


83. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Cundinamarca 

[Original] 

San Juan de Payara, January 11, 1820. 

My dear friend: 

I arrived at this place last night, bringing with me the Army of the 
East, but not without a loss of some 500 men by desertion; yet, despite 
this loss, we may figure that this army numbers at least 2,000 men, 
cavalry and all. 

General P&ez has returned from Barinas. He fought no battles, for 
the enemy gave him the run of the province; but he suffered ex- 
tensive desertion. Many of the deserters went over to the enemy, 
due to the treachery of certain of the captured officers whom we had 
taken into the service of the new Kingdom of Granada. What is 
more, his troops suffered greatly from sickness, shortage of provisions, 
and lack of horses. At all events, this army is back and has now re- 
joined me; and, with the recruits coming from New Granada, it will 
be greatly enlarged. We lack horses to such an extent that we are at 
a loss to know how to mount the army. There are horses here, but 
they are worn out with past labors. Of those fit for service we have 
scarcely enough to mount the officers. This places me in a quandary, 
for Morillo, according to our information, has his headquarters in 
El Tocuyo, a mountainous region, and has given orders for his ad- 
vance detachments to draw back toward him at the approach of the 
enemy. According to reliable reports, he will retreat as far as possible 
in an effort to ruin our cavalry; and, after drawing us farther from 
our sources of supply while he approaches his, he will engage our 
infantry in positions favorable to him. This plan, I believe, would 
be the most logical for the enemy and, by the same token, very 
disadvantageous for us. Furthermore, the dry summer season renders 
passage from here to the highlands extremely difficult for the horses. 
They are already in bad condition, and would be rendered useless 
for want of pasture and water long before reaching the field of 


2l8 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


battle. Everything suggests that we must allow a little time for the 
men to recover from their exertions, to restore proper discipline, and 
to permit the horses to regain their strength on the good pasturage 
now to be had near the Apure. Meantime, I shall maneuver on one 
flank of the enemy in an effort to force him to concentrate his forces. 
Such a concentration will exhaust his provisions, and eventually he 
will be forced to disperse his troops because of the condition to which 
we shall have reduced him. At such time, we can launch a full-scale 
offensive. 

How long it will take to perform all this, and how many expedients 
we must adopt in order to obtain a favorable outcome, allowing for 
all probabilities, I leave to your judgment. We have done much, but 
more remains to be done. I shall act immediately to hasten the taking 
of Maracaibo by the English troops and those under llrdaneta. Con- 
sequently, it is absolutely necessary that we occupy Merida and 
Trujillo, and occupy them permanendy, for they are the outer walls 
of New Granada, and their occupation will serve to keep Morillos 
right flank worried. The English forces must not, therefore, operate 
along the coast of Caracas until winter sets in, lest they find them- 
selves fighting alone in that area. 

General Bermudez, with the 1,000 English whom he went to 
collect at Margarita and any others he may have brought with him, 
must remain in the eastern provinces ready to proceed wherever he 
is most needed. General Sedeno s cavalry will invade the plains of 
Caracas to take whatever he finds there that will augment and sus- 
tain his division, which will watch the enemy's left flank. The main 
body of the army will remain under the orders of General Paez, 
ready to act immediately whenever it becomes possible and expedient. 

The enemy is certain to divide his forces, and when he does we 
must destroy him without fail, without risking the fate of Colombia 
in a general and possibly unsuccessful engagement. Discipline is the 
soul of the enemy troops, as valor is that of ours; and, in the final 
analysis, the former is of greater help in a pitched battle than the 
latter. In general, this is what I have been able to resolve as the most 
likely plan. I have not yet seen General Paez, whom I expect to- 
morrow or the day after. I have the assurance of an officer friend of 
his that he is of substantially the same opinion as I on this plan, 
and intended to suggest it to me, in view of the fact that the circum- 
stances are much too evident not to have attracted his attention. This 
slow pace may, perhaps, be very prudent, but it can also prove disas- 
trous, for the fortunes of war cannot be foreseen by man. Still, I am 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


219 

responsible for the destiny of eighteen free provinces, and I must not 
chance them on a throw of the dice. We must make a few more 
sacrifices, which, although painful, will eventually result in a happy 
ending. I am going to work with much energy upon the enemy's 
weak points, leaving the strong temporarily unmolested, so that small 
advantages may later contribute to our general advantage. I am like 
the rich man who, forced to take risks, amassed a great fortune 
which he then feared to risk in the ventures through which he had 
acquired it. Fate is generally blind, and I have become clear-sighted— 
an auspicious omen for the success of our cause. I may be wrong, 
but I have more confidence in prudence than in all the prophecies of 
the saints. 

The 14 th. 

I have withheld this letter until today, hoping for the arrival of 
General Paez, who wrote me at length on the matter in hand, but 
General Sucre took the correspondence with him. We are in agree- 
ment on everything, and shall immediately put into execution what 
has been discussed. General Sucre has been assigned by me to carry 
the equipment to New Granada, and all measures have been taken to 
avoid his being delayed anywhere by any accident. The troops that 
are to cover Merida will march immediately. They will number 
something less than 1,500 men, in order that Urdanetas division can 
operate with safety against Maracaibo in concert with the English 
under Montilla, to whom I shall write, again urging him to act with 
the utmost energy in that quarter. I told him to operate against 
Caracas throughout January, and against Santa Marta during 
February. In brief, I told him that my principal object in this cam- 
paign is to capture Maracaibo. Thus, my friend, we must now take 
every step necessary to carry out this plan. I presume that General 
Urdaneta is in Pamplona and that you, on your part, will do every- 
thing you can to forward your share in the enterprise, for upon it 
depends the fate of New Granada. When winter comes we shall be 
able to take vigorous action in Venezuela and in the south with 
large numbers of well-armed and well-trained troops. Consequently, 
during the summer we must prepare every detail of the campaign. 
For the present I commend to your particular attention the dispatch 
of quantities of munitions to the south and the supplying of Ur- 
daneta. 

I am your affectionate and devoted friend, 


BOtiVAR 


220 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

P.S. Today, the 14th, I had word from Colonel Salom of La Torre’s 
withdrawal to Merida, and while nothing has happened I am highly 
pleased, and you no doubt are greatly relieved. Salom tells me that 
our army is pursuing the enemy in order to fight him wherever it can. 
I plan to march immediately with the column that I have told you 
about, and we shall meet soon, without fail, as I shall delay no more 
than is necessary to make my preparations. Which is to say that we 
may yet meet before a month has passed. 


84. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Cundinamarca 

[Original] 

The Capital City of El Socorro, February 24, 1820. 
My dear General: 

I have received the correspondence which you sent me together 
with the resolution recognizing Colombia, which I find admirable. 
Tomorrow, I shall reply officially so that the resolution can be made 
public. 

The reservation is quite right; it was implicit in the Constituent 
Congress of Colombia. 1 A legislative body of that type always re- 
tains sovereign authority, and its will is absolute. For this reason it 
was not stated in the Fundamental Law that the Congress of Colom- 
bia was empowered to revoke, reframe, or amend this same law, the 
basis of the Colombian compact. Such a clause was deemed superflu- 
ous, and indeed insulting to the representatives of Colombia. 

Your letter, too, is wonderful. You write long and well on all 
things. What you say is almost true, and above all it is credible. I 
say almost, for it is not true that domestic tranquility depends on 
my remaining alive. I was once of that opinion, but no longer. 

Your complaints, dear General, are just, but they are not for me. 

1 A special junta convened by Santander in Bogotd approved the creation of 
the new Republic subject to any change that might be made by the Congress 
which was to meet in 1821 (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


221 


The fault was Zeas, who summed up my grand speech to the Con- 
gress. It was a long speech, and in it I spoke of you at length. I can 
say that I did you full justice as you deserve. I was very busy, and 
Zea is none too diligent. He took charge of everything and did 
virtually nothing , and that only after prodding. We needed the 
Gaceta that it might be sent, along with the Fundamental Law, 
abroad, and to you; but, what with ten thousand matters demanding 
attention, it went out such as you have seen it— not too bad, but 
none too accurate: I shall do better next time. 

I have already commented upon what you disclaim, or, rather, 
what you fear. Your reasons are the same as mine and all the others. 
Serve your country well; that is the best omen, according to Epam- 
inondas. Let the future bring what it may; you have only to bear 
yourself well, and posterity, which has no cause to misjudge, will 
do you justice. 

An amusing thought: The vice presidency is not bad with twenty 
thousand pesos income and no danger of losing a batde or dying in 
one, or being taken prisoner, or being thought incompetent and 
cowardly, as can well happen to a general in the field. You appear 
to have forgotten your position, or you are not so candid as I have al- 
ways believed you to be, and would like you to be. 

I know not how to thank you for all that you have done and said 
on my behalf. If, as you tell me, I have overwhelmed you with favors, 
let me state, and with more truth, that you have overwhelmed me 
with gratitude. Which are preferable, acts of power or of virtue? 
Are not the latter the more noble? You, then, have the better of me. 

We shall meet soon, very soon, for I am in desperate haste to leave 
the south and return north. There we shall embrace, and though 
neither of us is of an affectionate nature, we shall none the less ex- 
perience keen pleasure. We shall not utter fine phrases, but we 
shall think them, for great passions are ever sublime, and friendship 
above all others. Good-bye, I am your devoted 

BOLfVAR 

P.S. Sucre tells me from Caicara that 3,000 muskets are coming up 
the Orinoco. Hurray for this good news! 


222 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


85. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Cundinamarca 

[Letterbook] 1 

San Cristobal, April 20, 1820. 

Excellent Sir: 

I have the honor of answering Your Excellency’s official letter of 
April 2, respecting the leasing of salt mines and the instructions of 
General Valdes; the latter, according to Your Excellency, deal in 
part with the proclaiming of the emancipation of the slaves in the 
province of Cauca. 

The item in question reads as follows: “All slaves available for 
bearing arms shall be assigned to the army.” If I am not mistaken, 
this is not a proclamation of the emancipation of the slaves, but 
merely an application of the power granted me by the law, which 
reads: “Article 3. Nevertheless, those [slaves] that may be called to 
arms by the President of the Republic, or who shall render a dis- 
tinguished service, enter upon the immediate enjoyment of their 
freedom.” 

My authority is that law, and I so reply in full to Your Excellency’s 
observations. But, as is my custom, I shall explain my orders. 

I have ordered that slaves available for bearing arms be taken. It 
must be understood that this means no more than those that are 
needed for the ranks. A greater number would do the army more 
harm than good. 

The military and political considerations that have led me to order 
the drafting of slaves are quite obvious. We need robust, vigorous 
men who are accustomed to hardship and fatigue, men who will 
embrace the cause and the service with enthusiasm, men who will 
identify their interest with the public interest, and men for whom 
death can have little less meaning than life. 

The political considerations are even stronger. The emancipation 
of the slaves has been proclaimed both de jure and de facto . The 
Congress has had in mind the dictum of Montesquieu: In moderate 
governments, political liberty gives civil liberty its value, and he who 
is deprived of the latter is necessarily deprived of the former; he 
beholds a happy society, of which he is not a part; he finds established 


'Two copies of this memorandum are to be found in the archives: that 
published in O’Leary, XVII, 137, w r hich is incomplete, and the present one, 
which contains the philosophic argument in favor of the measure opposed by 
General Santander (comp.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


223 


security for others but not for himself. Nothing is nearer to the con- 
dition of beasts than to view free men everywhere and not be free. 
Men in this position are the enemies of society, and, if large in num- 
ber, they are dangerous. Small wonder then, that states with moderate 
governments are often troubled by slave rebellions, and despotic 
states only rarely. 

It is, therefore, borne out by the maxims of politics and derived 
from the examples of history that any free government which com- 
mits the folly of maintaining slavery is repaid with rebellion and 
sometimes with collapse, as in Haiti. 

In effect, the law passed by Congress is wise in all its parts. Is 
there a more fitting or proper means by which to win freedom than 
to fight for it? Is it fair that only free men should die for the 
liberation of the slaves? Is it not proper that the slaves should acquire 
their rights on the batdefield and that their dangerous numbers 
should be lessened by a process both just and effective? 

In Venezuela we have seen the free population die and the slave 
survive. I know not whether or not this is prudent, but I do know 
that, unless we employ the slaves in Cundinamarca, they will out- 
live us again. 

I, therefore, in exercise of the powers granted me by the law 
emancipating the slaves, hereby repeat my previous orders: That 
the Army of the South induct as many slaves capable of bearing 
arms as it may need; and that 3,000 unmarried young men be sent 
to the Army of the North. This last I strongly insist upon. 


86. To Guillermo White, Merchant of Trinidad 
[Copy] 

San Cristobal, May 1, 1820. 

My dear friend: 

I am truly pleased with the developments in Spain, for our cause 
has been decided by the tribunal of Quiroga. 1 The 10,000 enemies 

J On January 1, 1820, a revolt, headed by Rafael Riego and Antonio 
Quiroga, occurred among the troops that Ferdinand VII was preparing to send 
to America. The outbreak halted the dispatch of the expedition and, subse- 
quendy, Quiroga formed a new government which attempted to make peace 
with the new Spanish-American states (ed.). 


224 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

who were to be sent against us, due to an understandable philan- 
thropy, did not wish to engage in a war to the death, for they pre- 
ferred a war to the life. They well knew that they might escape 
danger in Spain, but not in America. What good fortune that these 
10,000 men, who were formerly our enemies but are now our best 
friends, refused to embark, choosing to remain in Spain! An in- 
credible stroke of fortune! Though Ferdinand may triumph, he can 
send no more expeditions, for the expeditionary armies know what 
to expect. Moreover, there must surely have been great opposition, 
even among the absolutists, to the idea of sending conscript armies 
to America. The opinion held by the troops has been clearly ex- 
plained by their support of the liberals. Even France, I mean the 
Bourbons, must have trembled as a result of the Spanish revolution 
and must have condemned Ferdinands conduct in this matter, as 
compromising to themselves. I say the same for England, whose con- 
cern is more significant: she fears revolution in Europe but welcomes 
it in America, as the one brings her endless cares, while the other 
gives her inexhaustible resources. 

North America, in accordance with her business-like conduct of 
affairs, will avail herself of the opportunity to take the Floridas, to 
gain our friendship, and to secure a wider field for her commerce. 
The action of Quiroga is thus a veritable conspiracy of Spain, 
Europe, and America against Ferdinand. Fie has earned it; but there 
is no longer any glory in being in so formidable a league against 
an imbecile tyrant. I, who have ever been his enemy, view with dis- 
dain this badgering of a ruined and expiring cause. Our resistance 
was, beyond doubt, highly meritorious when we stood alone, but 
now it might even be considered treacherous. I am most confident 
of our resources and prospects and also of the good services which 
our very best friend White has rendered and will continue to render 
us, whom I, in turn, assure of my devoted friendship. 


Bolivar 


SELECTED WRITINGS OE BOLIVAR 


225 


87. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Cundinamarca 

[Original] 

El Rosario de Cucuta, May 19, 1820. 

My dear General: 

Matters are proceeding to my entire satisfaction, due to a most 
fortunate sequence of events: the revolution in Spain, the arrival 
of the Irish expedition at Rio Hacha and of General Urdaneta with 
a thousand riflemen and about three thousand muskets, the silence 
of La Torre, Rodriguez expedition into La Plata, and the march of 
the Rifles and Pamplona battalions to Ocana and Maracaibo. All this 
is admirable; but lack of funds will be our undoing. We now owe 
more than five thousand duros, spent in purchasing livestock, build- 
ing the Zulia fleet, and in hospital expenses, which are very large. 
Yesterday the quartermaster came to me in despair to ask me for 
funds. He has no funds with which to purchase plantains which are 
being bought with the few pesos lent by the officers of the corps. 
I sent him to seek a loan of two thousand pesos in the Valles de 
Cucuta, as best he can, but these two thousand pesos will not last 
long as they are needed to pay numerous long overdue bills in San 
Cristdbal. 

Worst of all, I calculate that even if you send us the thirty thou- 
sand pesos which I have requested, these thirty thousand pesos 
monthly will hardly take care of the 2,200 men whom we must re- 
tain along this border. When we run short of cattle, which will 
occur by the end of this month or the beginning of the next, we 
shall have to supply the hospital with fowls, which cost ten or 
twelve reales , and the officers and men with hogs and goats, which, 
purchased at exorbitant prices, will not' last two months. My only 
hope is that some livestock can be had now and then from the llanos, 
for which I shall offer a high price to attract sellers. I shall do the 
same to procure rice, because provisions for the government are ob- 
tained with the greatest of difficulty, if at all. It would seem that 
my only task this winter will be that of provisioner, unless we receive 
a visit from Morillo. 

I have sent an expedition to La Laguna with instructions to pick 
up a prisoner or two and to bring me news of Maracaibo and the 
activities of our forces in that quarter. Yesterday, while returning 
from the Zulia, I saw our flotilla of canoes [bongos], which is pro- 


226 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


gressing famously. If all goes well, I may send 500 men by way of 
La Laguna to assist in the taking of Maracaibo. I am only thinking 
of doing this; I have not yet made a decision. I am also planning to 
dislodge La Torre from Chama and occupy Merida. This is not de- 
cided either, for I fear mishaps now more than when I lacked the 
means to repair them. Like a wealthy miser, I am very careful of 
my treasure; when we were poor and had nothing to lose, it was 
natural to fear nothing. 

I have ordered that the muskets from Velez be delivered to Bogota, 
in order that you can send them ahead to arm the Honda battalion. 
Have this battalion embark immediately and proceed to join forces 
with the squadron to aid in taking Mompox; or, if they are able, let 
them take the place unaided, without waiting for Cordoba. Above all, 
let them operate against the enemy as best they can, carefully or- 
ganizing their supply line between the provinces of Cartagena and 
Santa Marta; for Simiti, Ocana, and the lower water regions of the 
Magdalena afford more than enough supplies to maintain 700 men, 
the most that those forces can muster. As a general rule, our troops 
must learn to live off the land they occupy. I would follow this rule 
myself, but dare not, since upon the fate of this army depends that 
of Cundinamarca, and I fear that any losses suffered by my army will 
be irreparable. Its strength depends upon quality, not quantity, and 
for this reason I am very sensitive of any losses. The others can re- 
place recruits with recruits, but here there are no veterans to replace 
veterans: thus it is a matter of money, money, and more money. 

Salud y dinero. Good-bye. 

BOLIVAR 

P S. With the formation of the new battalions, Briceno has run out 
of his English cartridge belts. Send him 800 and, by all means, the 
thirty thousand pesos , which is the important thing, regardless of the 
cartridge belts. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


227 


88. To Guillermo White, Merchant of Trinidad 
[Larrazabal, Vida de Bolivar, II, 43] 

San Crist6bal, May 26, 1820. 

My dear friend: 

I take this opportunity to send you my address to the Congress, 
reprinted at Bogota, in the hope that you may view it with greater 
indulgence than heretofore. 1 1 believe that you criticized the creation 
of a hereditary senate and the education of future senators. The 
former is in keeping with the practice of all democratic republics, 
and the latter, with reason. Education molds the moral man, and to 
mold a legislator it is surely necessary to rear him in a school of ethics, 
justice, and law. You cite England as an example contrary to my 
thesis, but in England is there not a great deal still to be accom- 
plished? As regards my senate, let me say that it is neither an aristoc- 
racy nor a nobility, with the former possessing the right to command 
the Republic and the latter enjoying obnoxious privileges. The func- 
tion of my senate is to temper absolute democracy and to adjust the 
format of an absolute government to that of more moderate institu- 
tions; for today it is an accepted principle of politics that an abso- 
lute democratic government is as tyrannical as any despot; hence, 
only a hybrid government can be free. How would you have me 
temper democracy except with an aristocratic institution? Since we 
must not cross the monarchic with the popular form of government 
that we have adopted, we should, at least, make a place in the 
Republic for one permanent body to insure stability. Without sta- 
bility, any political principle becomes corrupt and terminates in self- 
destruction. 

Have the kindness to read my address carefully, with attention not 
so much to the parts as to the whole. All in all, it reveals that I have 
little confidence in the ethics of our fellow-citizens, and without 
republican ethics there can be no free government. To strengthen 
these ethics, I have proposed a fourth power, designed to train men 
in virtue and to hold them there. This fourth power may also strike 
you as faulty; but, my friend, if you want Colombia to have a re- 
public you must also want her to possess political virtue. The pre- 
cepts of the ancients teach us that men can be governed by even the 
most stringent of rules. The whole course of history shows that men 
will submit to whatever an able lawmaker may ask or a strong mag- 


1 See Doc. 70 (ed.). 


228 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

istracy enforce. Dracon gave Athens laws of blood and Athens sub- 
mitted to them, and, what is more significant, she obeyed them until 
Solon sought to reform them. Lycurgus decreed in Sparta what Platon 
would never have dared to consider for his Republic, if he had not 
had the Spartan lawgiver for a model. To what have men not sub- 
mitted? And to what will they not still submit? If there is such a 
thing as force with justice, it is the force employed in making men 
good, and, therefore, happy. Liberty is not genuine unless it aims 
to honor humanity and improve its lot. Anything else is sheer illu- 
sion, and, I fear, a dangerous illusion. 

Pardon me, dear friend, for this long digression upon my dis- 
course. You have merited it long since, and, if you were spared it 
before, it was more because of my inertia than my intention. Always 
your devoted friend, 

Bolivar 


89. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Cundinamarca 

[Original] 

El Rosario de Cucuta, May 30, 1820. 

My dear General: 

The other day I received your communication of the 16th instant, 
at San Crist6bal. I thought the special issue of the Gaceta very good. 
It should produce an excellent effect upon the enemy. 

I am glad that you are pleased with the news from Spain, and I 
regret that you are grieved with the troubles of my commissariat. The 
former is pure, unadulterated pleasure; the latter is a nuisance that 
can be eliminated only through persistence and hard work. The 
fourteen thousand pesos that you sent me came upon the winds as 
though they had dropped from the sky; they have helped us out of 
our difficulties this month, and, while something is still owed the 
troops, they are not insistent so long as they can eat and hope. 
Should the hundred thousand pesos which you promise me reach 
here by July, we can pay our way until August After August we 



Cavalry Charge. Battle of Araure. 





SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


229 


must procure something elsewhere, and in September we shall start 
on the march. So you see, our troubles are only a matter of three or 
four months' duration. 

The revenue duties that you suggest with respect to capita and 
property taxes are emergency measures which we should announce as 
being temporary, and let the novelty of the move reward us and ex- 
tricate us from embarrassment I think they will prove highly effica- 
cious, and I recommend that you proceed with them. 

Respecting the Constitution, I will say to you that we cannot en- 
force it except insofar as our present situation permits. The word 
plan [ensayo] sufficiently reveals that it should be given a trial with 
no intention of forcing either circumstances or events. Furthermore, 
this Constitution is merely a draft which must be revised in the new 
Colombian Congress and sanctioned by the people before it has force 
of law. All this taken together protects us from possible censure. 

I have just seen your letter of the 17th to Briceno. I do not ap- 
prove of dismantling rifles to make second-rate muskets. The former 
do excellently, even in small quantities, and we shall have more 
muskets than we can use. 

As for the slaves, if the hornets' nest is stirred up the result will 
be similar to that in Haiti. The greed of the colonists caused that 
revolution, after the French Republic decreed emancipation and the 
colonists spurned it. By their recalcitrance and stubbornness they 
spurred their natural enemies into action. The impetus to our revolu- 
tion has been given, and no one can now restrain it; the most that 
can be done is to give it proper direction. The example of freedom is 
alluring, and that of domestic freedom is insistent and compelling. I 
think that it would be well to clarify the thoughts of these men who 
have been led astray by their private interest and whose true interest 
must be made known to them. Gold and silver, of course, are precious 
things; but the existence of the Republic and the lives of her citizens 
are more precious still. I think that notices should be sent to the lead- 
ing men and property owners, telling them what they should know 
and reminding them of what they pretend not to know. I have said 
all this because of the letter from Cansino. Our path has been de- 
termined— to draw back means weakness and general ruin for all. 
We must triumph by the road of revolution and no other. The 
Spaniards will not kill the slaves; they will kill the masters, and then 
all will be lost. 

The law concerning the redistribution of property applies to all 
Colombia, and now, for good or ill, everyone is subject to it. I am 


2 3 ° SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

told, however, that certain changes have been made in this law, 
which I have not seen. Vouchers for national property are to be 
issued to the military, in order to enable them to purchase [land] at 
auction as the highest bidders. 

Respecting your diplomatic mission, I can assure you of two 
things: first, I cannot persuade myself that you really wish to leave 
your post at this time when you cannot be replaced except by Ur- 
daneta, whom no one can replace in his post, and of course I cannot 
believe that you mean to endanger the Republic; second, until we 
have defeated the enemy, and so long as I am in command, I would 
not think of having you transferred. When peace has been made, 
that will be another matter. I shall not command then, but I will 
propose to you that we leave together; though I would prefer lesser 
company, if, thereby, the Republic would gain a leader capable of 
governing. Regarding this, Zea is so capable that he has accomplished 
things beyond your imagination. He has had some new Welsares 
[sic] take over the Missions , 1 persuading the Congress to distribute 
these among a few foreign adventurers, to the detriment of right, 
reason, and the liberators. He has permitted Marino to go to Trini- 
dad, writing me that he was taking him to the north as an envoy. 
The first action is vicious, as it plants the seed of civil war; the other 
is absurd, for it will bring us additional discredit. When the Secretary 
of Finance refused to disburse the funds except in accordance with 
my instructions, Zea relieved him of his office, and, since he was 
responsible for the execution of the orders issued, Zea had him re- 
leased from responsibility by the Congress: anything, anything to 
please everyone, against my express orders not to use the funds except 
to buy arms. He ordered Paez to purchase all goods from Apure and 
to draw on the public treasury. You can see for yourself what a waste 
this was. Roscio told Zea, as did Sucre, that they both had the au- 
thority to send me Marino dead or alive. He ignored them. I can 
excuse disobedience, but not the consequences. He has had I do not 
know how many prerogatives bestowed upon his wife, in addition to 
fifty thousand pesos in property should he die in office. Instead of 
dispatching Sucre, he detained him against his will for over a month. 

I will not mention many other things for lack of space, and because 
I cannot recall them all. All this means that you must be Vice Presi- 
dent of Cundinamarca, and indeed of the Republic; for Zea lacks 

The Welzers, a sixteenth century German banking family, had been 
granted lands in Venezuela by King Charles I. The Missions were those lo- 
cated in the Orinoco River region (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


231 

the firmness to be the leader of a people such as ours, especially in 
times of revolution. 

You must destroy this letter, so that Zea may have no cause for 
resentment against me. I owe him much, but I know his faults. 

Good-bye, my dear General; you may command your affectionate 
and devoted friend, 

BOLIVAR 


90. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Cundinamarca 

[Original] 

El Rosario [de Cucuta], June 8, 1820. 

My dear General: 

Yesterday I received your kind letter of the 25th ultimo, giving me 
the news from Peru and Providencia. It is all most gratifying, though 
still in need of confirmation. 

I am writing you officially under this date, but here I repeat in an 
effort to make myself more clear. 

Our cavalry needs to be reinforced with llaneros from Neiva and 
the Cauca; send 100 of the former and 300 of the latter, strong, 
young, single freedmen, if possible. Our own llaneros will leave us 
the moment we win an action, and we need replacements. 

Write to Antioquia and order 300 men of the same description to 
C6rdoba with all speed, for the cadre [ cuadro ] of a cavalry regiment 
is leaving here for the Magdalena tomorrow. The officers are a daring 
lot, and, although the colonel, Miguel Antonio Figueredo, who is in 
Ocana, is not of the same calibre, he has other qualities of value to 
the service. I would send a better man, but I am retaining the best 
men in case Morillo should make his appearance. 

The column commanded by Heras arrived several days ago. They 
left with 1,100 men and arrived with 900, of whom only 500 are fit 
for service. Seventy are near death and the others are in serious con- 
dition. I am more and more convinced of the need for freedmen, for 
the unhappy men of these provinces are like wax that melts with the 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


232 

heat. Would you believe that the troop which Urdaneta brought was 
selected from among the strongest and healthiest, and yet not one 
recruit reached us in good condition? Would you believe that of 6,000 
men whom we sent to the lower Apure, scarcely a thousand-odd 
are left, and that the thousand or more brought by Urdaneta once 
numbered 6,000 men including their officers? We still have, how- 
ever, 2,000 infantrymen in Apure, including the British Legion and 
the former Hussars. 

Twenty-five hundred muskets have arrived, all in need of repair; 
for what with water, mud, and hard usage they are in a most horri- 
ble state. They are not totally wrecked, but every one of them must 
go through the armory. Those for the Guard are being cleaned and 
assembled, and later the remainder will be similarly treated. I will not 
distribute them, for it would result in their ruin. I am sending only 
a hundred to Ortega for the recruits to learn the handling of arms. 
I have written him to advise me when he has outfitted his battalion, 
so that I may send for it. I expect five companies from Vargas at the 
end of this month, and it will be absolutely necessary to season these 
troops before they go into action: and the time will be short, perhaps 
some two or three months. 

I think that you should, using the rifles that you have on hand, 
drill the Bogota battalion repeatedly to enable them to learn how 
to load and unload, as if they were ordinary muskets. Let them 
spend a few pounds of powder in very small charges to accustom 
them to firing. Let each company have its appointed hour to drill 
with the same rifles, that is, the first company at six in the morning 
and the eighth at six in the evening; let no day pass without having 
each company drill in the use of these arms, even if we lose the 
rifles through this repeated handling by raw, bungling recruits. As 
I am persistent about this, I want you to be also; otherwise, there 
will be no soldiers. There is a proverb that runs: H force de forger on 
devient forgeron. 1 

I am no longer determined to dislodge La Torre, despite the fact 
that he is said to have ordered his Navarra troops to Maracaibo. I 
fear, although it is unlikely, some accidental reverse, and, while a 
victory at this time would do us little good, a setback would result 
in great harm. But we are so badly in need of provisions that who 
knows but that hunger may not bid me march either forward or 
back? The plantains from the other side of the Tachira are now ex- 


1 “Practice makes perfect.”— Italics supplied (ed.). 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 2, 3 3 

hausted, and there are no other provisions there but the wretched 
cattle driven in from the llanos. The Guard lives on nothing more 
than a pitiful ration of decayed meat, for the few steer that reach 
Cucuta are earmarked for the hospital and the cavalry, and some ani- 
mals always fall by the wayside. Worst of all, there is no prospect of 
our getting any grain-notwithstanding our offer to pay seventy-one 
pesos the load, to treat the draft animals as sacred, to pay nine pesos 
freight, and to permit only grain suppliers to take cacao from Ciicuta, 
so that on their return they may profit at will on that commodity. 
I have received such unsatisfactory replies from the provinces that 
I hardly expect anything even for the hospital. The road from San 
Camilo, Urdaneta has assured me, is so bad that the men are in 
mud up to their necks. This is not encouraging, but, if you will 
send the money which I requested and which you promised me, all 
will be remedied by dint of sacrifice, hard work, and devotion. 

We have no news from Venezuela at present, but I await it 
anxiously, for it must be good news. 

I am sending some fifty reams of paper, medium-fine, of the sixty- 
odd reams brought by Major G6mez, along with other goods that we 
shall have to buy for the army at exorbitant prices. The paper alone 
cost twelve hundred and some pesos, for they say it is selling at thirty 
pesos the ream. 

Send me a mold, size eighteen to the pound. I need it for casting 
into cartridges the lead which I have obtained. 

I am vour devoted friend, 

7 BOLtVAR 


91. To [General Carlos Soublette] 


[Copy] 


Rosario, June 19, 1820. 


My dear General and friend: 

Yesterday I received a very interesting communication, dated May 
20 at Cartagena, which had been intercepted by Colonel Carmona in 
Chiriguand; from it we have learned definite news of Spam up to 


2 34 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

the month of April. On March 7, Ferdinand VII swore to uphold 
the Constitution and the Cortes in a decree that was forced from him 
by the will of the people and the urging of General Ballesteros. It 
seems that revolution was general throughout the Peninsula and 
that the King was without recourse when he accepted the Constitu- 
tion. His situation, therefore, is most precarious: he must yield to the 
people and the army, who desire peace and an end to sacrifice and 
death. The liberals themselves will have to submit to the army and 
make peace, for the army's basic demand is none other than it not 
be sent to America. The only way to dispel the very suspicion of this 
evil possibility is to end the war, and the entire Peninsula seems to 
agree on this point. On the other hand, Spain, having been unable 
to subdue us through her expeditions, will surely have less success 
without them. She has no interest in America except that of main- 
taining her trade monopoly, but her commerce is certain to fall off 
to nothing, for our large number of privateers will increase in inverse 
ratio to our military weakness: the less territory we have, the more 
they will increase. The liberals, being interested in the propagation 
of liberal principles, will encounter such opposition in Spain and 
throughout Europe that the Cortes will, of necessity, have to decide 
in our favor. The problem is now no longer a question of mere politi- 
cal economy; it is also one of internal preponderance, for, if any 
free governments exist in America, they will always find in us moral 
support and even the means to combat the absolutists. Affinity of 
principles never fails to create mutual attraction in political affairs. 
The absolutists, for their part, and especially Ferdinand, are, even 
more than the others, compelled to make peace, in order to pacify 
the army, which demands nothing else and which cannot be satisfied 
by any other means. Men are not content to be cured of the ills they 
suffer; they desire to eliminate the evil itself, because of the fear that 
it inspires and of the threat that it might return to plague them. 
Thus the Spanish troops will not be satisfied until they have seen the 
end of hostilities against us; they know from experience that every 
type of political system that has ruled Spain has shipped them to 
America. If anything retards our negotiations with Spain, it will 
surely not be because she lacks the desire, or because she has put any 
obstacles in the way. I believe that only the imminent risks that both 
parties stand to incur and the urgent pressure of their immediate con- 
cerns, nothing else, will cause them to neglect this expedient for the 
moment. Accordingly, it becomes our duty to afford the enemy both 
the means and the occasion to treat with us. These means can be 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


235 

initiated by our envoys in London and in the United States directly 
with the Spanish envoys and indirectly with such other foreign 
envoys who show a particular interest in our cause. This same ap 
proach suggests an infinite number of variants, more or less effective, 
more or less direct, through public and private channels: the press, 
conversation, friends, and, indeed, even through enemies. It will 
not be degrading to offer peace when it is based on the principles 
that are set forth in the Declaration of the Republic of Venezuela; 
which must form the basis of any negotiations, because, first, it is 
so laid down in the law of the Republic, and, second, the character 
and the future of Colombia demand it. Thus, to offer peace to the 
Spaniards is to demand of them the crown of victory, for, as peace 
is the only object of the conflict, to obtain it is to win. The Spaniards 
are thoroughly convinced that they are impotent against us, and they 
are suffering every possible calamity that war could inflict upon them; 
hence, to grant them peace, I say, is to accord them an important and 
desirable victory. They are in the position of Platos rich man: they 
have everything to lose and nothing to gain; and we, having nothing 
to lose, covet all that they possess. The conflict has left us nothing 
but our lives, and life means nothing to desperate men. The question 
of peace, fully developed, is all-inclusive, for it embraces every con- 
sideration that is nearest to our hearts and to those of our opponents. 
For this reason, we must offer peace, and nothing more, in return for 
independence. For us, independence symbolizes all the blessings of 
Heaven; and, for the Spanish, peace will be a source of endless future 
prosperity. 

Such then are my views, which I should like you, the Vice Presi- 
dent of Colombia, as well as the Secretary of State, to weigh most 
carefully. Use them as the occasion may demand, but do not wait for 
it to arise. Instead, seek it out and create opportunities if at all 
possible; for the present moments are utterly priceless to us, and 
Seneca should not be the only man who was ever capable of judging 
the value of time. 

If, by chance, news of any diplomatic negotiations should be 
known or reported, let the post grow wings; offer any reward to 
have the news brought to me promptly. I want nothing done in this 
matter without my knowledge. Nothing is easier than to protract 
matters; say that I am arriving at any moment, and wait for me. The 
presence of the individual is vital in everything, most particularly 
in diplomacy. In peace negotiations as in those of war, it is all-im- 
portant to be experienced. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


236 

The slowness of the posts exasperates me. At this rate I shall have 
to order payment to the Spanish mails, for they serve us better than 
the Colombian. Over two months ago muskets arrived at Angostura, 
and I have yet to hear of it officially. I am momentarily expecting 
the mails from Guasdualito, if, God willing, they have got that 
far. What a government for indolence! My desperation on this 
account is matched only by my indignation with those gentlemen. 
Do me the favor of telling them so. 

From the War Department you will learn of our military situation, 
which is as bright as could be desired, though still without decisive 
victories. The army has everything: provisions, money, health, and 
high spirits. All we need is ten thousand firearms; send them in re- 
turn for this good news. Do not fall victim to the foul air that blows 
from Angostura. If extremes must be adopted, it would be better 
to choose fury rather than apathy, which has reigned sovereign there 
to this day. Individuals such as these wish to govern, intrigue, and 
command! Finally, as with Milciades, they would be the death of the 
country's liberators. 

Good-bye, my dear General, I am your devoted 

Bolivar 


92. To General Miguel de La Torre 


[O'Leary, XVII, 265] 
General: 


San Cristdbal, July 7, 1820. 


I accept, with the greatest satisfaction, in behalf of the army sta- 
tioned here, the armistice which, in the name of the General in 
Chief of the Spanish Army, Your Excellency has tendered me for 
the term of one month, commencing yesterday. I regret that the 
envoys of the Spanish government have travelled at length in search 
of my General Headquarters; but Your Excellency can well acquaint 
them with the route that they should follow in the event they come 
to treat with the government of Colombia in peace and amity, recog- 
nizing this Republic as an independent, free, and sovereign state. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


2 37 


If the object of these gentlemen s mission is other than the recogni- 
tion of the Republic of Colombia, Your Excellency will kindly 
signify to them, in my behalf, that I am resolved neither to receive 
them nor to hear any proposal that does not have that principle as 
a premise. I trust that, within the period of one week, Your Excel- 
lency will have given me an answer regarding the continuation or 
termination of the armistice. Otherwise, hostilities will recommence 
upon the expiration of that period. 

God keep Your Excellency many years. 

Bolivar 


93. To General Pablo Morillo, General in Chief 
of the Spanish Army 

[O'Leary, XVII, 326] 

General Headquarters, El Rosario [de Cucuta], July 21, 1820. 
Most Excellent Sir: 

I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the communication 
that Your Excellency sent me, under date of June 22, from your Gen- 
eral Headquarters at Valencia. 

The Republic of Colombia rejoices to see the dawn of that bright 
day when Freedom will lay its hand of benediction upon unhappy 
Spain and when our former mother country will follow us upon the 
path of Reason. 

The people of Colombia have been resolved, for the past ten years, 
to consecrate themselves, to the last man, to the one cause that 
is worthy of the sacrifice of peace, namely, the cause of their op- 
pressed country. Trusting in the sacredness of their resolution, they 
pledged themselves, with the utmost solemnity, on November 20, 
1818, to fight forever against foreign domination and to refrain from 
making peace, except on terms of independence. I therefore take the 
liberty of sending Your Excellency the accompanying Fundamental 
Law, which sets forth the sole basis on which the Colombian govern- 
ment can treat with Spain. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


238 

It is with great pleasure that I have the honor of submitting to 
Your Excellency this forthright declaration, as a preliminary to any 
transaction between our respective governments and as a testimonial 
to the spirit of rectitude that characterizes our liberal and represen- 
tative system. The love of peace, so becoming to those who defend 
the cause of justice, will never be stifled by the pitiful cries of hu- 
manity, unless it is sacrificed in the course of such endless horrors. 
Your Excellency may be confident that neither the resentments nor 
the hatreds of those private interests which Your Excellency con- 
ceives to be enemies of peace shall be voiced. One cry alone resounds 
throughout Colombia, that of Nature demanding her rights, which 
have been trampled and confounded in the abyss of despotism that 
has caused endless desolation in every former Spanish dominion. 

The armistice solicited by Your Excellency cannot be granted in 
full until the nature of the negotiations committed to Toro and 
Linares has been made known. They will be received with the re- 
spect that is due their sacred office. Meanwhile, I refer you to my 
communications with General Miguel de La Torre. 

God keep Your Excellency many years. Most Excellent Sir! 

Bolivar 


94. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Cundinamarca 

[Original] 

El Rosario de Cucuta, July 22, 1820. 

My dear General: 

The latest correspondence from Guayana brings me news, some 
old, some fresh, more or less as follows: Soublette has been inaugu- 
rated as vice president. He confesses that he can only relate that 
there is not a penny there and that everything from Guayana must 
go to that department; that Bermudez is in San Fernando de Cachi- 
camo with none too many troops, gathered from all the eastern 
provinces— I fear they may be attacked and destroyed; that Vergara 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


*39 


writes that “muskets twelve thousand uniforms, powder, munitions, 
etc.” are on the way. These are Vergara s words, and who can tell 
whether he means muskets or uniforms? 

V6lez must now be near Casanare with three thousand muskets 
and other military supplies. I am enclosing his letter and a French 
newspaper, from which may be gauged the opinion in France on 
the day when Ferdinand gave up his despotic rule in Spain. 

Sucre is now in Guasdualito with about four thousand muskets 
and other materiel of war, but nothing can be moved because of the 
floods. Mancebo has just arrived from Guasdualito, having spent 
thirty-two days on the road; this explains why no cattle are arriving. 

Zea took the money that Hamilton had at San Tom&s and ex- 
changed the gold bars at a low price so that he could take them, too. 
He released funds to Marino and other useless individuals, and, 
above all, he has just secured an unlimited and absolute authoriza- 
tion from Congress to do anything that he sees fit in behalf of the 
Republic. Consequently, he has taken over all the money that Sucre 
could not use; furthermore, because of his delay in proceeding to the 
United States, that government has suspended everything, pending 
his expected arrival. Thus precious moments have been lost. Spain 
has now changed her internal politics, to America s liking. 

Roscio writes me of the arrival of a Spanish officer at Barbados, 
bearing sealed orders for Morillo to suspend hostilities until the 
Cortes shall meet and act. I believe that his instructions must be more 
extensive, judging from the tenor of his official letter of the 17th 
ultimo. Roscio writes me a volume on the possible opportunities for 
deception that are offered by the armistice. Revenga tells me, in an 
official letter, that we must give serious thought to the armistice, for 
the following reasons: The positions that we occupy are not all 
advantageous; the Peninsula desires peace; and the temper of the 
Cortes is uncertain and can be encouraged or discouraged, depending 
on our conduct. These points are correct, but I shall persist in re- 
jecting the armistice if there is no offer of independence. To defeat 
the Spaniards we must be made of steel. It costs us nothing to suspend 
hostilities de facto, if it suits our purpose, but it may cost us dearly to 
suspend them de jure . The slightest trustfulness may destroy us, and 
the slightest infraction may dishonor us. 

In the course of this month I expect a reply from Morillo to my 
letter to La Torre, as well as the arrival of the enemy deputation. 
The prestige which absolute refusal will bring us cannot be meas- 
ured, and perhaps a negative answer may do us more good than 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


240 

deception. Our blockade of Cartagena will continue, and the winter 
season, which favors enemy operations, will soon end, while we shall 
remain in a most formidable position, free to attack where we please, 
laboring always with extreme caution to maintain the glories and 
trophies that were won at Boyacd. How does this appeal to you? 
Much can be said against it, but I believe that my rebuttal would 
prove to be the stronger. Heavy defections in the enemy ranks are 
impossible, as their families are in enemy territory; our ever growing 
negligence would increase; our intriguers would play their part; am* 
bition would perhaps nourish herself upon her ashes, now grown 
cold; our immense camp would perhaps become one immense soli- 
tude, possibly one endless discord. We have two sources of authority, 
the government and I, and we would be at odds. Our expenses 
would continue, but to no purpose; Spain, from among her ruins, 
might find some hidden treasure, unknown and unsuspected by the 
best calculations. Europe is strong, hard, and shrewd, while America 
is young and very innocent. If the enemy wants an armistice, we 
must avoid one, for certainly our best interests would suffer. I could 
go on in this fashion, endlessly multiplying the reasons for my 
opinions in this matter. 

Without adding or removing a comma, have the proclamation of 
Quiroga, of January 5, printed exacdy as it was in Spain. 1 This is 
to be printed as a handbill of course, for distribution to the Spanish 
troops wherever they may be. I am your devoted friend, 

BOLtVAR 


95. General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Cundinamarca 

[Original] 

Ocana, September 13, 1820. 

My dear General: 

I hear from Trigos that my bay mule, which I left with you in 
Bogotd, is being kept by one Olaya at Juan Diaz’. If this is so, have 
her brought back and well cared for. Manriques mule is not fit to 


1 See note, p. 223 (ed.) 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 24 1 

carry fodder for my bay, and there is to be no such exchange. That 
is why I did not order her to be sent to him. 

In my official correspondence I mention how frequently your com- 
munications have been delayed. I do not know whether or not any- 
thing has been overlooked, though we have considered carefully all 
that you discuss. If it occurs to you that anything should be added 
or repeated, write me at Cucuta, where I shall be located for a few 
days, directing the troops. To be honest, however, I do not know 
where to send them to keep them well without impoverishing all 
Cundinamarca. I am quite resolved to take 4,000 men, but I do not 
yet know which they will be; if veterans, we shall lose half of them 
needlessly, and, if recruits, they will perish for no purpose. There 
is no point whatever in undertaking any major operation as long as 
there are lively hopes of concluding peace next summer. For, if we 
were to suffer a defeat, the enemy would take heart, as would the 
dissidents; thus we should be confronted with internal dissension 
and a superior enemy force. I think that we should plan and under- 
take operations in northern Cundinamarca and in Quito only, leav- 
ing Caracas for the following winter, if peace does not make it ours. 
This is my final plan, and I work day and night reflecting on the 
means which I must use in order to put it into effect. 

By leaving 2,000 veterans in Cundinamarca, we are always assured 
of holding that region, come what may. By taking 2,000 men to 
Merida and Trujillo, we are certain to occupy those miserable prov- 
inces. The troops will suffer great privation, however, as there is 
absolutely no catde with which to provision them in that area; and 
we shall still have to send at least 1,500 men into the llanos , to sur- 
vive there for a few days before they perish. I am sending you at once 
three cadres of battalions, to be assigned to Mariquita, Neiva, and 
Antioquia. Despite all this poor planning, you will have to keep three 
or four thousand men in Cundinamarca, not counting those in the 
Magdalena; however, the troops that we take will suffer extensive 
losses to no purpose— all for the sake of obtaining peace without risk- 
ing the fate of Colombia. Having examined every possibility, I find 
that we shall inevitably suffer losses— but we will insure our destiny. 

You will have heard that the slaves at Antioquia number only 200, 
that Briceno s column left 600 sick in El Socorro, that more than half 
the troops fell sick or died at the Magdalena, and that now I am un- 
able to find a healthy place for the troops of Cundinamarca. Every- 
where they are dying off at a terrible and frightful rate, and the 
same is true of those in the plains of the Apure. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


242 

Think over all that I have said, and write me your opinion post- 
haste at Cucuta, for you can aid me greatly respecting my confused 
ideas on effective means to save the Republic from mishap and the 
troops from sickness. 

Montilla has orders to send you whatever arms he can in the 
direction of Antioquia and Honda. 

Morales has orders to present himself for trial at Bogota . 1 What a 
pity that a man who served so well in the army should have borne 
himself so poorly in the government. I shall indeed be pleased if he 
can clear himself of the charges against him, for the sake of his honor 
and that of the government which employed him. I frankly confess 
that I never believed that Morales would commit such madness, nor, 
for that matter, that he would serve the Republic so well— at least in 
respect to his connection with the army, which is the only aspect of 
his career with which I am acquainted. 

Send as many arms and supplies to the south as Valdes requests, 
that he may put an end to his present inaction. I am greatly con- 
cerned over the Army of the South; in particular, I am anxious for 
it to take Quito before peace is concluded. 

Insist that the twenty-four thousand pesos be sent from Antioquia, 
in order that you may purchase the two thousand muskets, which 
should have reached Barranquilla by the time you receive this letter. 
If you fail to obtain this amount, do as you think best. The muskets 
should arrive, and they must be paid for; I have no idea where else 
they may be had, either on credit or by any other means. Those that 
have reached Angostura are not being sold, as there is no money for 
payment, so Roscio and Soublette inform me. 

I have urged Montilla and Lara to exert every effort to liberate 
the coastal region near Maracaibo. You encourage them also to see 
that this is done. Command of these operations, as well as of those in 
the south, remains under your immediate orders. 

Urdaneta will direct the operations in the north with the eight 
battalions now under his command. He will be dependent upon me, 
and I shall not move far from Cucuta in any direction. 

I am gready annoyed by the intrigues of the legislators, and I am 
more and more certain of the impossibility of maintaining a balance 
among ourselves. It will be a miracle if we save so much as the hide 
[pellejo] of this revolution. I am resolved to resign my command the 
day that the Congress of Colombia is inaugurated. I am so resolved 


Colonel Antonio Morales was cleared of charges of peculation and con- 
tinued to serve in the army (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


243 

in this, that I do not intend to be there, lest they force me to accept 
my dishonor and my undoing. For, with the men that we have [in 
the government], it becomes extremely difficult for a magistrate to 
escape one or the other of these perils, or indeed both. If we are not 
at peace by then, I shall accept command of the Army of the South. 
If we are at peace, I shall go abroad. All this is irrevocable; yes, ir- 
revocable. Please inform the Cundinamarca deputies about my de- 
cision, in order that they may think about a new President. If they 
admit me to the Congress, my vote will go to you, this being the 
dictate of my conscience, as I am convinced that there is no one 
better fitted for the office. Zea is not the man for such things. Roscio 
is a Caton much before his time, in a republic that lacks Roman laws 
and Roman customs. Of the others I have no knowledge. Soublette 
began to fail in his duty when he unconstitutionally relinquished the 
executive power. 

Good-bye, my dear General. I am your devoted 

BOLIVAR 


96. To General Pablo Morillo, General in Chief 
of the Spanish Armies 

[Blanco y Azpurua, VII, 492] 

San Cristobal, September 21, 1820. 

To His Excellency: 

At the outset of this campaign, I can do no less than to address my- 
self to Your Excellency, to give final proof of the candor of the gov- 
ernment of Colombia and the genuineness of its intentions. 

Your Excellency has invited us to an armistice with the apparent 
object of establishing peace in America. An armistice, however, with- 
out first having been offered at least the recognition of our govern- 
ment, would be extremely prejudicial to the interests of the Republic, 
which, in all probability, may confidendy look forward to final and 
complete victory. Continued hostilities should place in our possession 
the rest of Venezuela and Quito. Such action would free us from 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


2 44 

the heavy demands that are placed upon us by the maintenance of 
an unnecessarily large army in Colombia; while the suspension of 
hostilities, in a season that is favorable for active warfare and at a 
critical time for our enemies, would mean the loss of all the advan- 
tages that we may have gained from our constant, prolonged, and 
costly sacrifices. Nevertheless, the government of Colombia desires 
to manifest to Your Excellency and to the whole Spanish nation that 
it prefers peace to war, even to its disadvantage. The government of 
Colombia therefore proposes the opening of negotiations with Your 
Excellency with a view to settling the difficulties respecting the prof- 
fered armistice, always provided that, in return, Colombia be given 
the securities and the guarantee that she demands as prerequisites to 
this obligation. 

To facilitate and to speed the correspondence between us, I shall 
establish my General Headquarters at San Fernando de Apure by the 
end of October. I shall there await Your Excellency's reply, or such 
emissaries as Your Excellency may send, should you so elect 

In the meantime, our operations will not be suspended. 

God keep Your Excellency many years. 

Bolivar 


97. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Cundinamarca 

[Original] 

Trujillo, November 29, 1820. 

My dear General Santander: 

From the official communications you will note what has devel- 
oped in the last few days. The armistice is to our advantage because, 
with the establishment of uninterrupted communication and with 
our forces holding good positions in a continuous line of defense, we 
are in a superior situation to continue operations when the time 
comes; which, however, I believe will not be necessary, as the great- 
est advantage of the armistice will, to all appearances, be the end 
of the war. The treaty, which establishes rules for war, honors us 
greatly, for we proposed it. 


245 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

I visited Morillo the day before yesterday, and I honestly believe 
him to be a sincere and well-intentioned man. His misdeeds or mis- 
takes, he states, were the work of Enrile, and these gave us just cause 
to be incensed with Morillo, as he appeared to be their author. I 
really came to like him. 

A report is being drawn up of what passed at our interview, which 
is certain to amaze and astound even our friends. From Morillo down, 
the Spaniards vied with each other in the courtesies that they showed 
us and in their protestations of friendship. Their praise for our deter- 
mination and for the valor that has distinguished the Colombians, 
their repeated toasts to the Army of Liberation, in short, all the mani- 
festations of their desire for Colombian and Spanish friendship and of 
deep regret for past tragedies resulting from the strong feelings on 
either side, and, finally, their outspoken language, which surely came 
from their hearts, cost me a few tears and inspired in me a warmth 
of feeling toward more than one of them. 

There were many courteous and clever toasts, but I was most 
pleased with those of Colonel Tello and General La Torre. The 
former drank “to the victories of Boyacd, that brought freedom for 
Colombia'; and the latter “to the Colombians and the Spaniards, who 
side by side will march to Hell itself, if necessary, against despots and 
tyrants." Morillo, among many other exuberant and liberal senti- 
ments, toasted “the heroes who have died fighting for their country 
and their country's freedom." Indeed, it would take a volume to re- 
cord the toasts that were offered, for, as I have indicated, each Span- 
iard contended for the honor of eulogizing us. We responded to their 
courtesies in kind, with full measure and due modesty, to their com- 
plete satisfaction. 

General Morillo proposed that a column be erected at the spot 1 
where he received me and where we formally embraced, as a monu- 
ment for all time to commemorate the first day of friendship between 
Spaniard and Colombian. He has detailed an officer from among his 
engineers, and I am to appoint another to attend to it. We ourselves 
began the project by laying the cornerstone. 

I found that General La Torre pleased me greatly. He refuses to be 
merely a Spaniard and asserts that he will never depart, regardless 
of the outcome of the war; he insists that he belongs to Colombia and 
that the Colombians should accept him as a brother. This declara- 
tion, delivered nobly and with great dignity, filled me with admira- 


1 The village of Santa Ana, Colombia (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


246 

tion. He assured me that he would exert his every influence to termi- 
nate the war, for he is resolved never again to draw sword against us. 
His influence will carry weight, for he expects to remain in command 
of the army, as it has been announced that General Morillo has re- 
ceived permission to retire. 

I did not see one officer who appeared the least bit anxious to con- 
tinue the war; nor did any one so much as hint that peace could be 
obtained without independence. All firmly believe that not a shot 
will be fired after the armistice, as it will be followed by peace. 

Linares has assured me that an assembly of notables is to be formed 
in Caracas, from which deputies will be sent to the Cartes to explain 
the situation in this country and the necessity of dealing with the pa- 
triot government. Morillo will offer safe conduct to these deputies, if 
he departs, as he expects, and he has advised me to appoint my en- 
voys or plenipotentiaries, even suggesting that Briceno be one of 
them. 

I forgot to tell you that Morillo detailed two artists to sketch the 
more salient scenes, in order to prepare a number of plates to circulate 
in Europe. The column is also to bear various inscriptions, the ideas 
for which are highly appealing. 

You see, my dear Santander, it is time to suppose that peace is very 
near, if we are to call things by their right names. If I am mistaken in 
my calculations, I have been fooled by the most positive evidence. 

Since this interview, it no longer seems proper to write against 
these gentlemen in our public prints. I have so proposed, and we 
must comply, especially as it is in keeping with our policy to show 
that we have not been the irreconcilable enemies of the Spaniards, 
except when they were ours, and that, at the first sign of peace, we 
have accepted them as friends. 

Do not make use of this letter except among friends, as it contains 
passages which might compromise these gentlemen with their gov- 
ernment. A report of this event, which should be printed, will be 
transmitted to you. It will set forth everything extensively, including 
our departure, which was as pleasant and friendly as our reception. 
Alcantara, who has left for your city, will tell you everything in 
detail, as he was with me. 

In printing the agreements, particularly the one on the rules of war- 
fare, some tribute must be paid to the Spanish negotiators, who are 
excellent men and very human; but Brigadier Correa should be 
singled out, for he is without question the best man who treads this 
earth. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


247 


Alcantara is leaving with a Spanish officer to give notice of the 
armistice in the south. Fortunately that officer, who is good-natured 
and charming, can serve us well. Expedite the campaign in the 
south, so that this notice will find it far advanced. I cannot suffi- 
ciently impress upon you the importance of this point and the activity 
that you must exert to bring it about, in order that we may further 
our interests to the utmost without breach of justice, honor, and good 
faith. 

I intend to go to Barinas and Apure to review the line, station the 
forces, and reach Cucuta for the inauguration of the Congress. Ur- 
daneta will remain here. 

Good-bye, my dear friend. 

BOLiVAR 

P.S. Have a copy made of the memorial and instructions that were 
addressed to Samano by Viceroy Montalvo, of which you have the 
original; and send it to me, in fact at once. 

Sucre is not writing to you, for he has not laid down his pen for 
five days, and he is very tired. He sends you the regard and affection 
that he has always felt for you. 

[rubric of Sucre] 


98. To General Pablo Marillo, Commander in Chief 
of the Spanish Armies 

[Blanco y Azpurua, VII, 475] 

Trujillo, November 30, 1820. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

I have received, with great pleasure, the first personal and friendly 
words that you, my esteemed friend, have been so kind as to send me 
in care of Lieutenant Arjona. Those of us here who have had the 
privilege of knowing you and your worthy comrades-in-arms have 
experienced similar sentiments and impressions. It appears that a 
general change has taken place in our feelings, causing us to view 
everything in the most favorable light. For my part, I confess that 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


248 

my heart has undergone a change with respect to my new friends. 
Not a moment passes when I do not remember some thought, some 
thrill of pleasure, as I recall our interview. 1 I congratulate myself 
upon having made the acquaintance of men with such just claims 
upon my esteem, men who, amidst the illusions of war, were con- 
cealed from our sight by the shadows of error. 

Our Lieutenant Arjona has touched upon the difficulties which 
remain in drawing up the sacred document of our reconciliation, our 
truce, and the common rights of men. This document well deserves 
to be engraved upon a tablet of diamonds, encrusted with topaz and 
rubies; but it will stand inscribed upon our hearts. Lieutenant Arjona 
will give you his ideas upon this matter, and I refer you to him. 

I have again scanned the manifesto which you have submitted. 
I read it with pleasure, for it is the apologia of a man who deserves 
well of his country. It does not offend me, for the language of war 
is formal, and it is accepted as a language of convention intended to 
impair the adversary. Nothing except evil actions need trouble men 
of understanding. 

All our mutual friends thank you most sincerely for the ex- 
pressions of regard with which you have honored them, and they 
return the same with the best of good will. Most particularly, how- 
ever, we wish to mention General La Torre, whose manner especially 
pleased us; the elegant Colonel Tello; and our valued friend Capa- 
rr6s, who charmed us with his fine personality and expressive counte- 
nance. 

Accept, dear friend and General, the assurance of my high con- 
sideration and esteem. I kiss your hand. 

Sim6n Bolivar 


1 See Doc. 98 (ed.)« 


1821 


99. To General Jos£ de San Martin 
[Original] 

Bogota, January 10, 1821. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

I have the honor of acknowledging receipt of Your Excellency's 
dispatch, dated at Pisco, October 12 of last year. 

This moment is one that I have desired all my life; and only the 
day when I embrace Your Excellency and our flags are joined can be 
a happier one for me. The victor of Chacabuco and Maipu, the fore- 
most son of La Plata, neglects his own glorious record to make me 
the object of his lavish encomiums; yet they honor him, for they are 
brilliant testimony to his generosity and disinterestedness. Apprised 
that Your Excellency has set foot on the shores of Peru, I must pre- 
sume that they are already free. I hasten, in anticipation of news of 
this act, to congratulate you on [the liberation of] this, the third fa- 
therland that owes its existence to you. 

I am marching to fulfill my promise to reunite the Empire of the 
Incas with the empire of freedom. Without doubt it will be easier to 
enter Quito than Lima; but Your Excellency is better able than I to 
render the difficult simple. Soon divine Providence, which has thus 
far protected the standards of law and liberty, will bring us together 
in some corner of Peru, after we have trod underfoot the trophies of 
the tyrants of America. 

From the enclosed pamphlets Your Excellency will learn of the 
latest developments here. Among others, there is an armistice and a 
treaty for the regularization of war, which is well worth Your Excel- 
lency’s attention. 

Be good enough to accept the most sincere expression of my pro- 
found consideration and respect. 

Your Excellency’s obedient servant, 

S. BOLIVAR 


250 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


100. To Ferdinand VII, King of Spain 
[Contemporary Copy] 

Bogota, January 24, 1821. 

Your Majesty: 

Permit me, Your Majesty, to address to the throne of love and of 
law the reverent expression of my most sincere congratulation on 
Your Majesty's arrival upon the greatest and freest throne of the first 
continent of the universe. Since the day when Your Majesty seized 
the sceptre of justice for the people of Spain and the rainbow of peace 
for the people of America, you have won favor in the hearts of all. 
On that day Your Majesty entered the portals of immortality. Peace 
is the word spoken by Your Majesty's lips. Peace, we repeat, enrap- 
tured— and peace it shall be, because such is Your Majesty's will and 
ours. 

Your Majesty has chosen to learn the truth from us, to hear our cause, 
and, doubtless, to accord us justice. If Your Majesty proves himself to 
be as noble as the government that he directs is sublime, Colombia 
will take her rightful place in the political world. Your Majesty need 
but assist the new course of events, in order to find yourself, eventu- 
ally, upon the summit of the largest mountain, dominating all good 
fortune. 

Colombia's existence is a necessity for Your Majesty's peace of 
mind and for the welfare of the people of Colombia. It is our hope 
to offer to the Spanish people a second homeland— one that is proudly 
erect, not bowed in chains. The Spaniards will come to gather the 
sweet fruits of virtue, knowledge, and industry— they will not come 
to seize them by main force. 

Deign attentively to heed the natural demands conveyed by our 
envoys, and Colombia will become the paragon and the glory of any 
monarch of any time. 

Accept the most humble and respectful homage of one who is 
Your Majesty's most obedient and attentive servant. 


Sim6n Bolivar 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


251 


101. To General Pablo Morillo, General in Chief 
of the Spanish Armies 

[Copy] 

Bogota, January 26 , 1821 . 

My dear friend: 

I have learned, much to my satisfaction, that you have at last 
managed to return to your beloved country to enjoy the keen, pure 
pleasure of again seeing your native land and beloved family. Accept 
my congratulations on your happy arrival at the court of Madrid, 
where, without doubt, you will be received in a manner befitting 
your services and sacrifices in behalf of your government. I choose to 
believe that you will contribute greatly toward throwing light upon 
the war in America and that your reports will redound to the bene- 
fit of unhappy Venezuela. 

I regret to tell you that I have received no communication wherein 
you inform me of your departure for Spain. Only the thought that 
some unavoidable delay is responsible consoles me for this silence. 

Lieutenant Colonel Van Halen brings you the original instructions 
from Viceroy Montalvo to Viceroy Samano. I have preferred to send 
the original because it may possibly serve you more effectively than 
a copy. The envoys, Sartorio and Espelius, have pressed me to send 
our diplomatic agents to the government of Spain. Accordingly, I 
am sending Revenga, our Secretary of State, and Dr. Echeverria, the 
political governor of this province. Doubtless you will be good enough 
to assist this mission insofar as you are able, as you offered to do in a 
similar instance. You were our enemy, and now you are called upon 
to become our most faithful friend; if it were otherwise, we should 
make a mockery of our pledges at Santa Ana and tear down to its 
foundations the monument to our friendship. Our envoys are fully 
authorized, and, if His Majesty's government desires peace, it will 
give satisfaction to all, even if it is concluded before the month of 
June. I have taken the liberty of sending a letter of congratulations 
to the King for coming to the throne of love and law, and for seizing 
the sceptre of justice for the people of Spain and the rainbow of 
peace for the people of America. Further, I extol him as the glory of 
the monarchs of the world and beg him graciously to heed the pleas 
of Colombia for her political existence. In this expression of my senti- 
ments His Majesty will see to the very bottom of my heart. 

Have the goodness, my dear friend, to convey to your adored wife 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


252 

my humble respects and to receive for yourself the cordial regards of 
your most devoted servant 

Bolivar 


102. To the Director of the United Provinces 
of the Rfo de la Plata 1 

[Contemporary Copy] 

Tunja, February 4, 1821. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

Desiring to strengthen the ties which should unite us, as well 
as to proceed harmoniously and uniformly in the negotiations for 
peace and recognition, which the insurrection in Spain has made 
possible, I take the liberty of continuing my earlier communica- 
tions by informing Your Excellency of the rapid strides with which 
Colombia nears that happy end. 

In the year past, I had the honor of advising you of early develop- 
ments in the revolution on the Peninsula and of Colombia's firm 
resolution neither to shrink from her noble enterprise nor to enter 
into negotiations with Spain, unless recognition of the absolute inde- 
pendence of the republics of America was accepted as the primary 
basis for negotiation. Although the haughty and overbearing manner 
of the Spanish leaders was modified with the change in their govern- 
ment, the negotiations proceeded in spite of my stubborn rejections. 
In the process, I had occasion to observe that the altered principles 
and foundations of the Spanish government had changed her senti- 
ments toward America as well. Rebellion in America is no longer a 
criminal rebellion: it represents the demands of Nature and of rea- 
son, expressed by peoples sufficiently vigorous to make themselves 
heard and respected. These happy and unforeseen attitudes on the 
part of the Spaniards, and the repeated protests of sincerity and good 

1 Civil war had ended the existence of the United Provinces. Following the 
Battle of Cepeda in February, 1820, each province was governed separately. 
Jos6 Rondeau was the last Director. This letter was probably addressed to him 

Ced.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


2 53 

faith with which they proclaimed their earnest desire to achieve a 
true reconciliation, served as the basis for the armistice agreement 
which I signed in Trujillo on November 27 last. It was also the basis 
of the treaty for the establishment of rules of warfare, which followed 
immediately. You will find them both in the enclosed printed sheets. 
You will be surprised to note therein a lack not only of the presump- 
tuous arrogance of superiority and domination but also of the bar- 
barous thirst for blood and vengeance that have heretofore charac- 
terized the behavior of the Spaniards in America. 

The conduct of the war having been established on the most liberal 
and humane principles ever proclaimed by any people, following 
negotiations carried out on a level of perfect equality, the sovereignty 
and independence of Colombia may be said to have been recognized. 
In truth, it seems that everything is working in our favor, and that 
recognition will be the inevitable outcome of the mission which I 
recently sent to His Catholic Majesty, in response to the one sent 
me in his behalf. The conferences and private talks, held in London 
between the ministers plenipotentiary of Spain and of Colombia at 
that court, have already prepared the path which the new envoys 
have only to follow. 

Spain, on her part, appears to have decided to contribute to the 
great work of our emancipation; she offers as the sole objection the 
insubstantial character of the principles upon which we intend to 
erect our governments and, particularly, the lack of unity and stabil- 
ity of those already formed and the many changes and disturbances 
to which they are subject. The slightest disharmony, our most trivial 
disagreement is judged, in Spain and in the eyes of all Europe, as 
being darkly ominous. The flame and mobility of liberty, viewed 
from afar, take on an appearance of sedition and [civil] war. Europe 
observes everything, and, absorbed, as it were, in the contemplation 
of our conduct, she observes and criticizes our every mistake or devia- 
tion. She expects us, as republicans, to be virtuous and wise; she 
demands firmness, stability, and permanence in our institutions. She 
will not forgive the errors of youth, for she holds that a people which 
aspires to be free must be expert, strong, and well-informed regarding 
its best interests. Nothing will influence her viewpoint more than 
to see us act in harmony while we are negotiating the peace. We 
should profit from Spains preoccupation with her own rehabilitation, 
for she cannot hope to continue the war with us, in light of the risks 
to which her present weakness would expose her and the self-contra- 
diction that so doing would imply. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


254 

If the republics fighting Spain were mutually leagued by an 
implicit and virtual pact identifying their cause, principles, and in- 
terests, it would appear that their conduct should be uniform and 
identical. No republic could then accuse another without the accusa- 
tion being equally prejudicial to both; and, conversely, any demand 
made on behalf of one, would be understood to extend to the others. 

Because I was thoroughly convinced of the justice and necessity of 
these principles, I ventured, in my last communication of this past 
year, to point out to you that Colombia would demand the recogni- 
tion of all of her sister countries who were engaged in the struggle 
for liberty. I implored you to heed my plea and to believe that the 
time had come to wrest from Spain the recognition of our independ- 
ence. For us to request and insist on this recognition at the present 
time is to attain it, but to permit this unique opportunity to escape 
us is to rekindle Spains hopes and ambitions. 

I well know that Your Excellency and the illustrious leaders and 
representatives of your judicious government do not have to be 
warned or advised. My government does not pretend to enlighten 
you. My purpose is merely to affirm the conduct of Colombia on 
this occasion and to submit it to the consideration of Your Excellency 
and of the heroic people whom you so worthily govern. I do so in 
testimony of the disinterested sentiments of unity and amity by which 
I desire to see our mutual relationship strengthened, not as between 
two distinct peoples, but as between two brother peoples who sus- 
tain, protect, and defend one another. I reaffirm my previous assur- 
ances that I will demand and work for the recognition not only of 
Colombia but of your republic and of the others in South America. 
I offer Your Excellency the most active cooperation in achieving the 
plans which Your Excellency and the representatives of your coun- 
try may have in mind to obtain that end, whether through negotia- 
tions or through reforms deemed necessary to strengthen and consoli- 
date the new institutions in such a manner as would guarantee 
liberty to the people and protection for the government against the 
conflicts and excesses of the latter. This, Your Excellency, is all that 
I propose. 

Colombia's ports and vessels will receive and hold any disturbers 
of the public order that the government of your republic may desire 
to punish by the necessary deportation of those fanatics who, flattered 
by the favor shown the people, may think that they are entided to 
cast aside every principle in order to attack the laws and to destroy 
whatever is not conducive to, and in conformity with, their ambition 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


2 55 

and personal advancement. Such men, unfit to be a part of any so- 
ciety, deserve to be removed from society if the government seeks to 
promote the public freedom which these men undermine on the pre- 
text of enthroning and defending it. Only force can check the im- 
petus of passions unleashed by the effect of revolution and war and 
aggravated by the opposition; only strong and energetic measures can 
save a country already caught in the maelstrom of passions and the 
horrors of evil. To remove the instigators of disorder and to sentence 
them so that, in the school of tolerance, they may acquire experience 
and love of the good which they now lack, is the surest means of 
rehabilitating them and of restraining the impulses of others. Grant 
me these reflections which arise from my anxious wishes for the 
tranquility and prosperity of your republic and for the establishment 
of its government on the unalterable foundations of order, under the 
auspices of true liberty. 

From the commissioners of the Spanish government whom I have 
received I learn that a similar mission is to be sent to Your Excel- 
lency. Its principal object, I understand, is to observe our forms of 
government and ascertain our inclinations respecting negotiations 
with Spain. If they find our governments firm and stable and pos- 
sessed of sufficient willingness to forget the past and not disposed to 
regard Spain, our friend, with the same horror as Spain, our ruler, 
it is almost certain that recognition will be granted us at the price 
of some slight concessions— insignificant when compared with the 
inestimable benefits of peace and acknowledgment of the freedom 
and independence of our republics. 

Deign to accept the sincere expression of my highest consideration 
and respect. Your most respectful and obedient servant, 

Bolivar 

His Excellency the President, 

Pedro Briceno Mendez, 

Secretary. 


256 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

103. To General Miguel de La Torre 1 
[Letterbook] 

Cucuta, February 19, 1821. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

The efforts of the governor, garrison, cabildo, and people of Mara- 
caibo to remove themselves from Spanish domination has created a 
problem between our respective governments which appears at once 
difficult and dangerous; but it will entail no consequences if it is 
resolved by justice and right. I will begin by stating frankly that I 
disapproved of the march of Major Heras on that city. He will be 
brought to trial for having exceeded his authority in not awaiting the 
decision of his chief to take over, under protection of the arms of the 
Republic, a territory which belonged to Spain at the suspension of 
hostilities. 

The protests and reasons contained in the proclamation issued by 
Maracaibo on January 28, to justify her action, clear this government 
of any charge of having incited such an action and dispel any impu- 
tation of bad faith or violation of the armistice on my part. The gov- 
ernment of Colombia could not possibly know, nor did it wish to 
know, the view of that town respecting its rulers; it could not and 
did not desire to meddle in, or judge the merits of, its grievances. 
Neither could the government of Colombia anticipate the outburst 
of resentment nor could it prevent or suppress the outburst, as that 
was not within its power. Thus, I believe that no just charge can be 
brought by virtue of the incident itself, and that the only apparent 
grounds for claiming a violation [of the armistice] lie in the impetu- 
ous action of Major Heras. In setting forth to you the principles 
which justify his action and which, therefore, make it necessary for 
this government to support him, I shall concern myself only with 
his action. I repeat, however, and I beg you to bear in mind at all 
times that justice and right are the premises on which I believe the 
decision should be based, and that this communication is concerned 
only with the enumeration of such premises. No decision shall be 
reached until we have reciprocally explained our positions and come 
to an understanding. 

Your Excellency is aware that in the absence of special pacts or 
treaties between two warring nations they observe the common law 
of nations. When such pacts exist, however, their literal meaning 


1 Commander of the Spanish forces in the Costa Firme area (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


2 57 

is followed, and whatever is not prohibited therein is permissible. 
This principle must be even more stricdy applied when the war is 
not one between constituted nations but between peoples who are 
breaking old ties to form new ones. Your Excellency is aware also that 
between Spain and Colombia there have not been, nor do there now 
exist, any treaties other than those of the armistice and that concern- 
ing the conduct of war. They alone provide the rules by which we 
must be guided. This, moreover, is especially true because neither 
people has considered itself subject to any law throughout the long 
course of the war. 

The armistice of Trujillo contains no clause denying us the right 
to assist any person or persons who place themselves under the pro- 
tection of the government of Colombia. On the contrary, my negotia- 
tors, in opposition to those representing the Spanish government, 
maintained that we reserved the right to shelter and protect all who 
should embrace our cause. Accordingly, the treaty includes no men- 
tion of the article in which His Excellency the Count of Cartagena 1 
demanded the return of deserters and of those who had changed 
sides. The armistice, therefore, only prohibits hostilities and the tres- 
passing of either party on the others territories. 

With this principle established, the matter is narrowed to merely 
inquiring whether or not the occupation of the Maracaibo territory 
by a Colombian column on January 29 constituted an invasion of 
Spanish territory. Prior to this inquiry, we must first agree that our 
present state of war has not ceased by reason of the suspension of 
hostilities; that there is a tremendous difference between a state of 
peace and a truce, in which the horrors of war are only momentarily 
ended; and, lastly, that the armistice treaty in no way guarantees the 
integrity of our respective territories— a very special point and one 
which, as a rule, distinguishes and characterizes a treaty of peace. 

The proclamation, a copy of which I have the honor of enclosing, 
is an irrefutable document, the most spontaneous, formal, and solemn 
by which a people can express its will. The people of Maracaibo, on 
January 28, thereby proclaimed their absolute freedom and independ- 
ence from the Spanish government. Neither Colombia nor any of 
the other regions of America who are fighting Spain have any right 
or ground, other than this, to take up arms in order to seek to enforce 
their recognition. Since Colombia and the other parts of America at 
war constitute separate peoples— they cannot be considered part of the 


1 Morillo (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


258 

Spanish monarchy because Spains ownership rights in America are 
only those of force and conquest, and such rights cease to govern 
when possession is ended— Maracaibo, placed in a similar situation, 
ceased to be Spanish territory as of January 28 . Therefore, in occupy- 
ing that place, Colombian forces occupied a territory that was beyond 
the realm of Spanish law, as it was no longer part of Your Excel- 
lency s nation. Maracaibo was thus free to choose her form of govern- 
ment or to join the nation best suited to her interests. The law of 
nations [derecho de gentes] 1 authorized Colombia to open her doors 
and admit that people, or, at best, to establish any type of relations 
with them that she desired. Spain herself has confirmed this right be- 
cause of her participation in a recent positive act— which was scandal- 
ous both in fact and circumstance. I refer to the occupation of Mon- 
tevideo and the eastern part of the Rio de La Plata by the armies of 
the Emperor of Brazil. Brazil, not at war but at peace and friendly 
with Spain, having recognized and guaranteed the integrity of the 
Spanish monarchy, invaded and took possession of that section of 
the Rio de La Plata and held it in her possession in spite of Spanish 
protests. Spain did not consider that her treaties had been violated 
or the peace existing between the two nations broken as a result of 
this action. Brazil offered no further explanation of this occupation 
other than that the occupied territory was one which had separated 
from Spain and which thus constituted a separate nation. 

I wish to repeat and to point out again to Your Excellency the 
difference existing between two friendly nations and two who are 
other than friendly and who, on the contrary, are engaged in bitter 
warfare and are subject to no ties whatsoever which existed prior to 
the war, as all such bonds are held null and void. There is also a 
fundamental difference between occupying a country at the express 
and urgent desire and invitation of the people, as Colombia has done 
in the case in question, and occupying it by force, over the resistance 
of those holding it and over the rights of two friendly peoples, like 
Buenos Aires and Spain in the case of Brazil. And if this action of 
Brazil did not violate her solemn guarantees and treaties of peace 
with Spain or give cause for war, can the Trujillo armistice be 
deemed broken by an act infinitely less grave? The conduct of one 
nation with respect to another constitutes the law of nations. That 
law which exists for Brazil and for Spain, who submitted their claims 
to negotiations rather than to hostilities, must serve as the basis for 


1 International law (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


259 


the establishing of a law between ourselves, in order that we may set- 
tle our differences by law and reason, and not by force of arms. 

Moreover, if none of these considerations suffice to convince Your 
Excellency of my lawful right to protect Maracaibo, I will adopt a 
method which has won approval in other instances. Let each of us 
name arbitrators and submit to their decision. For my part, I abide by 
my offer at Santa Ana: it shall be Brigadier Correa. 1 

Above all, it is my duty to inquire of Your Excellency clearly and 
precisely: 

1. Whether, in the event that Maracaibo is not returned, there 
will be an outbreak of hostilities before the expiration of the armi- 
stice. 

2. Whether notice must be given forty days in advance, or hostili- 
ties are to start forthwith, and without notice. 

3. Whether the forty days are reckoned from the day on which 
notice is forwarded or from the day that it is received. 

4. Whether notification must be given each corps or division com- 
mander on the same terms as the general in chief and in the same 
period of time. 

I shall pattern my conduct on the conduct that you observe in 
Venezuela as well as in Cundinamarca and Quito. 

God keep you many years. 


104. To General Luis Eduardo Azuola 
[Original] 

Trujillo, March 9, 1821. 

My dear General: 

I have learned with the greatest regret that our most worthy Vice 
President, Roscio, is gravely ill and in mortal danger. For this reason, 
and as I do not have an acting secretary of state, I have appointed you 
to take over the government in this extraordinary crisis. I also author- 
ize you, in case there are vacancies, to appoint temporary ministers if 


1 At Santa Ana, the meeting place of Morillo and Bolivar, the latter urged 
that arbitration be used to settle any violation of the armistice (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


260 

Messrs. Gual and Urbaneja, the present appointees, should fail to 
arrive in time. 

Arrange for the inauguration of the Congress as quickly as possi- 
ble. Deliver a speech that is plain but elevated in tone— no heavy 
phrases, no archaic words. Much less should you sing my praises; in- 
stead, take pains to follow, in point of subject matter, the speech 
Ferdinand VII made to the Cones or the one delivered by the Presi- 
dent of the United States to his Congress. 

All of you must work prompdy for the organization of the Con- 
gress, in order to elect immediately a president and a vice president of 
Colombia, since those who hold these offices will have no legal stand- 
ing until they have been named by the General Assembly of Colom- 
bia. For my part, you may rest assured that I will not again accept 
the presidency; first, because I am tired of giving orders; second, be- 
cause I am weary of being accused of having ambitious intentions; 
third, because the world will be led to suspect that this country has 
no one else fit for that high office; fourth, because I am only competent 
to serve as a military man; fifth, because the government would con- 
tinue to be an orphan, as in the past, whenever I could not find time 
to attend to its duties; sixth, because I do better in the provinces at 
the head of the troops, which are the support of the government; 
seventh, because I must pacify Venezuela and make a trip to Quito; 
and, finally, because I am meeting opposition and, should I be 
forced, I would resign. Colombia has three men of reputation, abil- 
ity, and integrity, who are military men capable of leading this Re- 
public, which is at present a military republic. These men are Gen- 
erals Narino, Urdaneta, and Santander. I list them in this order 
because that is the order of their seniority and not because I wish to 
show preference for any particular one, for, in my opinion, they are 
equal in merit. Moreover, there are many of our countrymen who 
might become president, but, however great their worth, I do not 
think that this is the time for them. You gentlemen, however, can 
discuss this matter with greater impartiality than I and consequently 
with greater wisdom. 

I beg you to communicate this part of my letter to all my friends 
in the Congress so that they may do all they can to prevent my be- 
ing reelected president. It should be understood that I will never 
again be president, for if, to my sorrow, they should appoint me, I 
will always be away from the capital or ill. State this to the Congress 
in my name so they may know that the real president of Colombia 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


26l 

will be the vice president and may, for this reason, elect the man best 
fitted for the duties involved. 

Please, dear friend, do me this favor to repay the affectionate re- 
gard of one who is most devotedly yours. 

BOLIVAR 

P.S. I remit to you the message of Presidente Monroe, although 
it is in English it can be translated. About foreign affairs you must 
say we are in harmony with every government in the world except- 
ing that of Spain; about this one you must state the treaties of 
armistice and regularization of war and the mission of peace sent to 
Madrid. You must add that with the independent governments of 
America, we have the most close relations and that with some of 
Europe we expect they will be very satisfactory. In this part you must 
be very circumspect so as not to be a prey to enemies and neutrals. 
You must be profuse to demonstrate: first, the reunitement of Colom- 
bia; second, its military glory; third, the enumeration of its free prov- 
inces; fourth, the unity in political as well as military affairs; fifth, 
the good administration of justice; sixth, the improvement of internal 
revenue and seventh, the probable hope of a satisfactory and final 
agreement with peace or victory. But in all this you must follow the 
route that you consider most natural and convenient. I include my 
note to La Torre about Maracaibo so that you may speak about the 
right that we have to protect that city. I am also sending a com- 
munication from La Torre about Maracaibo. Consult, my friend, the 
Secretaries Osorio, Vergara and Azuero, so that with frankness they 
will correct your speech, imitating the simple style of the American. 
Keep in mind that this step will bring you honor and for this reason 
you must not overlook anything that could improve it. 


262 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


105. To Fernando Penalver, Deputy to the 
Congress of Cucuta 

[Original] 

Barinas, April 21, 1821. 

My dear Penalver: 

You can well imagine how deeply I have felt the many misfortunes 
which have befallen you since we last saw each other— the death of 
your beloved wife, the troubles of all your family, your illnesses, and 
the variety of sorrows that you have suffered these many years. Let 
me assure you, dear friend, that, amidst the tumult of my military 
life, I have managed to retain some feeling of sensitivity that enables 
me to sympathize with you; thus, your woes are my woes. I would 
send you aid right now, if any part of the money that I collected in 
Sante Fe when we entered the capital were left me. I have long since 
been without a maravedt, as I used the money to aid my family and 
the families of various generals and fellow soldiers. The remainder 
was squandered by Domingo Ascanio. For this reason and many 
others, I have not one real to call my own, and our disbursing office 
is also out of funds. 

My aide-de-camp, Clemente, is on his way with a sealed document 
for Vice President Narino, in which I tender my resignation to the 
Congress. I am writing a long letter to General Narino. Ask him to 
tell you what is in it. It is my opinion that the president should be a 
military man from Cundinamarca, and the vice president a civilian 
from Venezuela. If this view meets with your approval, please take 
a hand in making it a reality. But even if my resignation goes against 
your conscience, please see that it is accepted. You may be certain 
that I will never be president; even though I should be named a thou- 
sand times over, in the end I will resign. Eight years as head of this 
republic of ingrates have wearied me. I am tired of being dubbed 
usurper, tyrant, despot, and I am even more weary of duties that are 
so contrary to my nature. On the other hand, I believe that special 
knowledge is required to administer a state— a knowledge that I do 
not possess and that I find utterly distasteful. You must know that I 
have never seen an account book, nor have I ever bothered about my 
household expenses. Neither am I made for diplomacy, because I am 
extremely guileless and easily excited; I know only the meaning of 
the word. I do not know anything about anything, but, as I am natur- 
ally inclined to love liberty and good government, I will fight for my 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


263 

country with the greatest of pleasure, and I will defend the laws, 
which I believe to be the best in any congress. I could not even serve 
in the vice presidency of a department, although I might perhaps 
help to pacify one, if necessity so demanded. 

Do not be misled by your preconceptions about me, because I my- 
self will prove you wrong and my enemies will then hate you the 
more. I am firmly resolved not to take the leadership, and I know 
that all will be lost if there is no government. 

I firmly believe that the choice of a president can be made between 
Generals Narino and Santander. You can be vice president, and, if 
that is not to your taste, there will be no lack of votes for Gual or any 
one of the many others who will be desperate for the post. In a word, 
you must make up your mind not to see me again at the helm, if you 
want to see me again at all, even if it be as general. 

Do not forget that the only way to preserve the unity of Colombia 
is to elect a general of Cundinamarca as president; and understand 
that they will be happier to have him holding executive office than 
myself— although I do believe that the deputies from Cundinamarca 
will hold the greatest deference for me. But the deputies are not the 
people, and you know now that our kind is not liked in New Gra- 
nada. You must further understand that neither you nor I, though we 
reach a ripe old age, will ever see that cordial harmony which should 
prevail in the great family of state. Thus, the more steps we can take 
to achieve this goal, the better. 

I wrote La Torre that, if he would let us have the western part of 
the province of Caracas, the remainder of Barinas, and Cumand, at 
the same time effecting a proportionate reduction in troops, we could 
have another armistice; but he replied in the negative, claiming that 
he lacks authority. We will therefore reopen hostilities on the 28th 
of this month with the same number of troops that they have, as this 
army is like a leaking bag. 

I shall do everything possible to avoid risking the country's destiny. 
We cannot continue to remain idle as we are dying of hunger and 
disease. I expect Bermudez and Urdaneta, on the flanks, to damage 
them and to gain some ground. P4ez and I will complete the victory, 
if victory it is. Our enemies have lost their hold on public opinion, 
which is now on our side. 

Farewell, dear friend. 


B OLtVAR 


264 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


106. To General Antonio Narino, Vice President of Colombia 
[Contemporary Copy ] 

Barinas, April 21, 1821. 

Dear Sir and esteemed friend: 

I should be greatly pleased if I knew that you had arrived in 
Cucuta without incident. The sudden passing of your predecessors 
must be somewhat of a shock to you, and Heaven grant that you do 
not follow them on their voyage to the land of the silent. It has been 
rumored here that our mutual and worthy friend Azuola has breathed 
his last. It will truly be sad for me if such a misfortune has befallen 
his family and the Republic. 

I have every confidence that you will overcome the difficulties that 
may hamper the inauguration of Congress, the one thing that is 
nearest my heart at this time. I desire most keenly to have that legisla- 
tive body meet in order to complete, at last, the foundation of the 
republican edifice that is still to be erected thereon. We have done 
nothing but clear the ground in twenty-two provinces and prepare 
a book entitled the Constitution, which is meaningless to every- 
one. 

But you will see for yourself that nothing else has been accom- 
plished because the transitional character of the government, the com- 
missioning of a few individuals to foreign countries, the death of two 
vice presidents, the absence of the ministers, the difficulties of con- 
voking Congress, the nonexistence of a central revenue administra- 
tion, the disorganization of all branches, my absence from the capital, 
my stay in the army— all this and many other things have kept the 
Republic, so to speak, in a state of orphanage. Colombia, governed 
by the sword of its defenders, is a military camp rather than a body 
social. Accordingly, abuses, negligence, and lack of any unifying ele- 
ment are the inevitable consequences of those beginnings which, for 
many reasons, it has not been within my power to counteract. 
The first such reason is that one man cannot, in a very limited time 
and with scant general knowledge, do it all, either badly or well; 
second, that I have devoted all my attention to driving out our ene- 
mies; third, that there are many considerations that must be kept 
in mind amidst this amazing chaos of patriots , godos, self-seekers, 
blancos, pardos, Venezuelans, Cundinamarquis, federalists, centralists, 
republicans, aristocrats, the good and the bad, and the swarm of 
hierarchies which divide each of these groups. So that, friend, I have 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 265 

often had to be unjust as a matter of politics, nor could I be just and 
not be criticized. 

As I am fully convinced that someone other than a soldier like 
myself who is always at the border should head the government, and 
that the command of the army and the direction of the Republic must 
be kept separate, I am tendering my resignation, so that you and the 
other responsible citizens can arrange for its acceptance. If you fail, 
you may count on the governments being orphaned forever and on 
me to abandon the office the very day that our enemies are defeated. 
Please, my friend, believe me when I say that I have meditated at 
length on these matters during the eight years I have governed the 
Republic. I am not versed in the art of government. I cannot and do 
not wish to govern, for to do anything really well one must have an 
inclination or, still better, an uncontrollable passion for it. 

For my part, each day I feel a growing repugnance toward the com- 
mand, and, if I remain, and I will remain at the head of the army, 
I will do so because from the first day of my public career I have 
been consumed with the urge to do my part in driving out our an- 
cient oppressors. I render this service by inner compulsion, not be- 
cause of any personal merit. I hope that you will exert all your influ- 
ence so that I am not forced to commit an act that will reflect upon 
me rather than upon the good name of the Republic, an act by which 
both would suffer more than can be foretold. Imagine the impression 
that would be created abroad if the Chief of State were to abandon 
his post, and the anarchy that would result in this Colombia of ours! 

If you do not wish to be president, you can suggest another who 
could serve in that capacity as worthily as yourself. General Santander 
is an excellent possibility; if not him, then Urdaneta, Montilla, Res- 
trepo, Penalver, Zea, or many others who have, more or less, his 
qualifications. My opinion in the matter is that the president should 
be a military man from Cundinamarca and the vice president a civil- 
ian from Venezuela, to avoid jealousies and disagreements— if these 
can be avoided amidst the whirl of so many blind passions. 

Good-bye, dear friend. 

Bolivar 

P.S. You may inform Penalver of this letter. 


266 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


107. To Pedro Gual, Minister of Foreign Affairs 
[Larraz&bal, Vida de Bolivar, II, 9 1 -92] 1 

Guanare, May 24, 1821. 

• . . You gentlemen cannot form a true picture of the spirit with 
which our soldiers are imbued. 

These are not the soldiers you know; these are soldiers you have 
never known. They are men who have fought long and hard and 
who, believing that they deserve much, feel thoroughly humiliated 
and miserable. They are without hope of gathering the fruit of what 
they have won by the lance . They are obstinate, ignorant llaneros, 
who have never regarded themselves as the equal of men who know 
more or who make a better appearance. I myself, who have always 
been at their head, still do not know all their capabilities. I treat them 
with extreme consideration; and yet this consideration is not enough 
to inspire in them the confidence and frankness that should exist 
among comrades and fellow-citizens. You can be sure, Gual, that we 
are over an abyss, or, rather, over a volcano that is about to erupt. I 
fear peace more than war, and, in saying this, I leave it to you to 
imagine all that I leave unsaid, for it cannot be said. . . . 

BolIvar 

1 This precious fragment of a letter is to he found only in Larrazdbal’s Vida 
de Bolivar . Blanco and Azpurua reproduced it (VII, 601), adding a few words, 
for the purpose of clarifying certain statements of Bolivar; in effect, they weak- 
ened them with intercalations which, fortunately, are rare and are not intended 
to alter the truth in any way. (See the Gaceta de los Museos Nacionales, Vol. 
Ill, Nos. 1, 2, 3 [Caracas, 1914]) (comp, and ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


267 


108. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Cundinamarca 

[Original] 

San Carlos, June 13, 1821. 

My Dear General: 

In the midst of my military preoccupations, I am constantly re- 
minded of you, although now it is not with the same thought as 
before— that is to say, not by the money that you used to send us, for 
I have given that up forever, since the barrier was erected at Cucuta. 
At present, I mean to say, I am reminded of you only by thoughts of 
friendship. I suppose you are kept extremely busy raising the reserve 
army and appeasing the complaints of Congress about the military: 
both activities are essential in order to avert the ravages of war and 
civil strife. Procure quantities of muskets and munitions to prevent 
Bogot&s being occupied by a third military excursion. The truth 
should be aired. Everywhere the enemy is losing territory, public 
opinion, and supporters. Yet, despite these conditions, our forces are 
equal. The enemy has been checked at Carabobo; however, as Colom- 
bia is so large, if we should lose a major action, they would gain a 
great deal of territory. 

Little is known here of the Congress or of Cucuta. Many in Cun- 
dinamarca are said to favor federation. But I console myself with the 
fact that neither you, nor Narino, nor Zea, nor Pdez, nor I, nor many 
another venerable authority in the army of the free has any taste for 
such delirium. Ultimately, indeed, the learned will go so far that 
they will be banished from the Republic of Colombia, as were the 
poets from Platos. These gentlemen think that their opinion con- 
stitutes the will of the people. They do not realize that in Colombia 
the people make the army, because they are the army, and they have 
wrested this country from the hands of tyrants. Moreover, it is the 
people who choose, the people who act, and the people who have the 
final say. The rest are old men either more or less malignant or only 
partially patriotic, but they have no right to be more than passive 
citizens. This policy, which certainly does not stem from Rousseau, is 
one that in the end will have to be encouraged, so that these gende- 
men will not again be our ruination. They pretend to us to perform 
the second act of Buenos Aires, whereas the second act that they are 
going to perform is that of Guarico. These gentlemen believe that 
Colombia is filled with dullards [ lanudos ] who sit around the firesides 


268 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


of Bogotd, Tunja, and Pamplona. They have not troubled to notice 
the Caribs of the Orinoco, the herdsmen of the Apure, the seamen 
of Maracaibo, the boatmen of the Magdalena, the bandits of Patia, 
the indomitable citizens of Pasto, the Guajibos of Casanare, and all 
the savage hordes from Africa and America who, like deer, run un- 
tamed in the solitudes of Colombia. 

Do you not suspect, my dear Santander, that those lawmakers, more 
ignorant than ill-intentioned, more presumptuous than ambitious, are 
leading us on the road to anarchy, then to tyranny, and, in any case, 
to ruin? I believe this; in fact, I am sure of it. So if the llcmeros 
do not complete our destruction, it will be accomplished by the 
tranquil philosophers of a legalistic Colombia— those who fancy them- 
selves to be modem replicas of Lycurgus, Numas, or Franklin; like 
Camilo Torres or Roscio; Uztaris or Robira; or other geniuses with 
whom Providence had endowed the earth to hasten its march 
toward eternity. But our philosophers are concerned not with repub- 
lics such as the Greek, the Roman, and the American, hut with 
heaping up the ruins of monstrosities in order to build a Greek edi- 
fice on a Gothic foundation on the brink of a crater. 

Good-bye, my dear Santander: may all go well with you. Look 
forward to the victory of Carabobo which we are going to win; 
recruit your reserve army; be lenient with the Congress; and remem- 
ber me with the esteem that I have for you. Your friend, 

BOLIVAR 

P.S. The Urdaneta division is due to arrive here in the next two or 
three days. General Urdaneta will remain in Carora because of his 
old ailments. General Paez has been with me since the day before 
yesterday. Soon we shall begin the battle. 









SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 269 

109. To the President of the General Congress of Colombia 1 
[Draft] 

Valencia, June 25, 1821. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

Yesterday a splendid victory confirmed the political birth of the 
Republic of Colombia. 

The divisions of the liberating army, having joined forces on the 
fields of Tinaquillo on the 23d, early yesterday marched upon the 
enemy headquarters at Carabobo in the following order: the first 
division, comprising the stalwart British battalion, the battalion of the 
Bravos de Apure, and 1,500 horse under General Paez; the second, 
comprising the second brigade of the Guard, with the Tiradores , 
Boyaca and Vargas battalions, and the Sagrado squadron led by the 
dauntless Colonel Aramendi, all under the command of General 
Sedeno; the third, comprising the first brigade of the Guard, the 
Rifles, Grenadier, Vencedor de Boyaca, and Anzoategui battalions, and 
the cavalry regiment of the intrepid Colonel Rond6n, all under the 
command of Colonel Plaza. 

Our march through the narrow gorges and wild country that sepa- 
rated us from the enemy camp was rapid and orderly. At eleven in 
the morning, we defiled to our left, opposite the enemy army and 
under enemy fire; as we forded a stream that could be crossed by 
only one man at a time, we were exposed to an army that was 
well entrenched both on an inaccessible height and on a plain, which 
enabled it to envelop us in a crossfire. 

Valiant General P&ez, leading the two battalions of his division 
and the cavalry regiment of the daring Colonel Munoz, marched with 
such boldness against the enemy's right that in half an hour the 
enemy was completely surrounded and cut off. Never can sufficient 
honor be rendered to the valor of these troops. The British battal- 
ion, led by the worthy Colonel Ferriar managed to distinguish it- 
self among all these stouthearted men, but it suffered heavy officer 
casualties. 

The conduct of General P4ez in the latest and most glorious 
Colombian victory has entitled him to the highest military rank, and, 
in the name of the Congress, I tendered him, on the battlefield, the 
post of a general in chief of the army. 


1 The presidency at this Congress, held at Cucuta, revolved among the dele- 
gates (ed.)* 


iyo 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


Respecting the second division, only a section of the Tir adores de 
la Guardia battalion, which is commanded by the worthy Major 
Heras, went into action. But its general, despairing that his entire 
division could not enter the battle because of the nature of the 
terrain, charged a mass of infantry and, in the attempt, died with a 
heroism well befitting the end of the noble career of Colombia's brav- 
est of the brave. In General Sedeno the Republic has lost a most able 
supporter in war and peace. There was none more valiant than he; 
none more obedient to the government. I commend the ashes of this 
general to the Sovereign Congress, in order that they may be ac- 
corded the honors of a solemn triumph. The Republic is no less 
grieved by the death of the most intrepid Colonel Plaza, who, with 
unexampled ardor, flung himself upon an enemy battalion, to force 
its surrender. Colonel Plaza has earned the tears of Colombia, and 
he should be accorded due honor by the Congress for his outstanding 
heroism. 

After the enemy army had been routed, our leaders and officers 
went in such hot pursuit that we suffered a heavy loss in those high 
ranks. The bulletin will list the names of these illustrious patriots. 

The Spanish army exceeded 6,000 men, comprising the best of 
the expeditionary forces sent to pacify the country. But this army is 
no more. At best 400 men may have straggled into Puerto Cabello to- 
day. 

The army of liberty equalled that of the enemy in size, but no more 
than a fifth of its number decided the battle. Our casualties are by 
no means severe: perhaps 200 dead and wounded. 

Colonel Rangel, whose efforts are always prodigious, today 
marched ahead to establish the line against Puerto Cabello. 

May the Sovereign Congress accept, in the name of the brave men 
whom I have the honor of commanding, the homage of an army 
tried and true, the greatest and finest ever to bear arms on any battle- 
field in Colombia. 

I have the honor of remaining, with the highest regard, Your 
Excellency's most humble servant. 1 

Bolivar 


'With a view to raising the morale of his troops, Bolivar, in this letter in- 
tended for popular consumption, exaggerates the facts. In reality, the entire 
patriot army took part in the battle. The Spaniards, surprised by the envelop- 
ing movement of the Paez and Sedeno divisions on their right, were, at the 
decisive moment, fighting against odds. While this maneuver was being carried 
out, the Plaza division continued to face the main defenses of the Spaniards. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


271 


110. To General Miguel de La Torre 
[ Letterbook ] 

Caracas, July 2, 1821. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

As I am always disposed to promote peace and harmony between 
the Spanish nation and the Republic over which I preside, and as 
your last communication and that of my commissioners to the court 
of Madrid have convinced me that the final treaty which they were 
to negotiate has already been concluded, I am taking the liberty of 
sending Your Excellency this note. 

Should you, moved by the same sentiments as I and similarly 
satisfied respecting your government's inclinations to end our disas- 
trous war, be willing to advance the time when this country may 
enjoy the sweet fruits of a long-desired peace, I will be more than 
pleased to treat with you or with the commissioners that you may 
designate for the purpose. It is right that the evils which already have 
doubtless been reduced should be definitely terminated. It is right 
for us to take steps to stem the flow of blood from our new and 
grievous wounds; and it is wholly appropriate to our common senti- 
ments that we should prepare to receive the inestimable benefits of 
peace, by setting aside the instruments of war, and that we should 
regard each other in the future as friends forever. God keep, etc. 


111. To Fernando Penal ver, Deputy to the 
Congress of Cucuta 

[Original] 

Valencia, July 10, 1821. 

My dear friend: 

Following our victory at Carabobo, I marched to Caracas and La 
Guaira to overtake the enemy division which, having routed General 

When the Spaniards abandoned these defenses and moved to meet the main 
attack, there was nothing to stop Plaza's division from overrunning the plain 
and completing the victory. Entire battalions surrendered, Colonel Plaza was 
killed, and the Spanish cavalry fled, cut down by the ruthless charges of Pdez. 
General Sedeno died trying to subdue the Valencey battalion. The royalist 
army suffered the loss of some 1,000 to 1,500 dead and wounded, 1,700 un- 
wounded prisoners, and 1,000 who scattered in disorder (comp.). 


272 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


Bermudez, was barring the way to Caracas and La Guaira. The 
latter has capitulated, and most of the people have joined us. It will 
all be reported in the papers; meanwhile, we have no time to lose. 

I so divided our men on the battlefield that Major Heras might cut 
off Tello and that Colonel Iribarren might pursue those who had 
taken to the llanos . This latter plan has probably succeeded, but not 
the former. There are over 2,000 soldiers in Puerto Cabello. Generals 
Cruz Mourgeon and O'Donoju have arrived with the Asia expedi- 
tion. They bring scant supplies and fewer men. 

With the exception of Puerto Cabello the whole country is in 
our hands, but we have not picked up so much as a straw, as the 
enemy carried out a perfect evacuation. I shall make every effort, 
nevertheless, to maintain the army. The refugees of one party or 
another have carried off everything. 

I am discussing an armistice with La Torre, as we cannot easily 
hold out here with large numbers of troops. Consequently, you and 
the others must direct all your efforts toward the south, so that Quito 
will be ours before the armistice. This is my major assignment for 
you at this time, because it is necessary and vital; peace is expected at 
any moment, and, if we do not then possess Quito, the Spanish will 
not cede it to us. 

I have greatly regretted the crazy action of General D’Evereux. 
Such madness is a real misfortune, because it compromises the govern- 
ment and its officers and because it broadens the scope of this affair, 
which should have been strictly personal. In short, I repeat, I have 
felt this misfortune keenly. 1 

I receive very few communications from Cucuta. I know very 
little about the Congress and its work, and, although I am fully oc- 
cupied in organizing this area, in directing the war, and in admin- 
istrating the revenues, which have been reduced to nothing, in 
spite of all this, I repeat, I am very deeply concerned with what 
is happening in the Congress and in Cundinamarca. I greatly de- 
sire to return to my beloved Cundinamarca, principally in order 
to move south rather than to remain in the capital, as I fear 
that something unforeseen may happen to our troops if they, not 
being of the highest calibre, should be exposed to reverses. Fur- 
ther, my friend, I believe that until peace comes I shall be unable to 
leave this demonio'polis or city of demons, who continually trouble 

1 General John D'Evereux had challenged Vice President Narino to a duel 
over a supposed insult to the widow of an English officer. Narino had him 
jailed, but the fiery Irishman was subsequently released (ed.)* 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


273 


us, whether at peace or at war. All is chaos: nothing worthwhile can 
be done, because the good men have disappeared, and the bad have 
multiplied. Venezuela presents the appearance of a people suddenly 
roused from a long lethargy— nobody knows where he is, what is to 
be done, or what is what. Everything is in embryo. There are no men 
to do anything. In addition to all this, I have a large army on my 
hands, which I do not know how to maintain, although it must be 
kept intact if we are not to lose all that we have won. 

I have no news from Europe. Vaguely I have heard that Spain 
continues in a very bad state and that the King of Portugal has re- 
turned to Lisboa. This may prove to be of great importance. 

I have learned with great pleasure of the Congress decision regard- 
ing the fundamental bases for Colombia. I should have regretted it 
if they had been altered, for I am convinced that only a miracle can 
save us from civil war, and that only unity and firmness can help 
effect this miracle. 

I am extremely busy and cannot say more. If I do not write often, 
have patience, and console yourself with the thought that one day 
like Carabobo makes up for many letters. Moreover, I am extremely 
weary. My life is too active, and I now view sedentary labors with 
aversion. I give you my regards from the bottom of my heart. 

BOLtVAR 

P.S. It is most urgent that you hurry here to take over and organize 
everything in connection with this intendancy. 


112. To the President of the Congress of Colombia 
[Letterbook] 

Valencia, July 14, 1821. 

To His Excellency: 

The resolutions of the General Congress of Colombia respecting 
the emancipation of the slaves are perfecdy in accord with existing 
laws; but they could have been devised so as to extend their full bene- 
fits to those future Colombians who, born in the cradle of cruelty and 
savagery, are brought into the world only to bow their neck to the 


274 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


yoke. Those children who shall henceforth be bom of slaves in 
Colombia should be free, for these creatures belong only to God and 
to their parents, and neither God nor their parents wishes them to 
be unhappy. The General Congress, empowered by its own laws and, 
still more, by the laws of Nature, should decree the absolute freedom 
of all Colombians by the fact of their birth in the territory of the 
Republic. In this manner property rights, political rights, and natural 
rights will be brought into harmony. 

Be so good, Your Excellency, as to submit this petition in my name 
to the General Congress of Colombia, that its members may grant 
it in reward for the battle of Carabobo, won by the Army of Libera- 
tion, whose blood has flowed for liberty and nothing more. 

God, etc. 


113. To Lord Thomas Cochrane, Admiral 
of the Chilean Navy 

[Draft] 

Trujillo, August 23, 1821. 

My Lord: 

The greatest pleasure to which my heart will thrill, as I approach 
the ancient Empire of the Incas and the newborn republics of the 
southern continent, will be the tribute of admiration which I shall 
render one of the most illustrious defenders of freedom in all the 
world. I shall, My Lord, esteem it my great good fortune to make 
your personal acquaintance in the theatre of your recent triumphs, 
on the waters of the Pacific. 

I invite Your Excellency to come, in victorious cooperation, to the 
borders of Colombia, on the coasts of Panamd, and make your vessels 
available to the Colombian soldiers, who, having unfurled the ban- 
ners of victory above all the walls of the Republic, are eager to hurry 
to the Andes of the south to join their fearless and heroic brothers-in- 
arms, so that all may march together to break whatever shackles op- 
press the sons of America. The Chilean fleet, the fleet of Lord Coch- 
rane, will transport, across the seas which it has freed from the foes 
of commerce, the army of Colombia to aid that of Peru. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


2 75 


I doubt not, My Lord, that because of Your Excellency's generous 
sentiments, you will expedite, insofar as you are able, whatever 
measures are necessary to wipe out forever the Empire of Evil in the 
New World. 

My aide-de-camp, Colonel Ibarra, who will have the honor of con- 
veying to Your Excellency the expression of my most sincere senti- 
ments of regard and respect, will be the bearer of such other com- 
munications as Your Excellency may have the kindness to receive. 

I am, with the greatest esteem, Your Excellency’s most obedient 
servant. 

BolIvar 


114. To General Bernardo O’Higgins, 

Director of Chile 

[Draft] 

Trujillo, August 23, 1821. 

The moment that Providence bestowed victory upon our arms on 
the fields of Carabobo, my first glance was toward the south, to the 
army of Chile. Imbued with the most ardent desire to assist in the 
triumphs of the liberating army of Peru, the soldiers of Colombia 
march onward to smash, wherever they may encounter them, those 
chains that still shackle the enslaved peoples of South America. 

While marching on so sacred a mission, I am sending my aide-de- 
camp, Colonel Ibarra, to His Excellency General San Martin, to 
request him to be so kind as to facilitate the means of uniting the 
armies of Colombia with those of Chile. Wherever these brothers- 
in-arms exchange their first embraces, there will be bom a fountain 
of liberty which will benefit every section of America. 

Should it please Your Excellency to extend your good offices to 
this worthwhile enterprise, all our brothers can be freed forever. 

I have the honor of tendering Your Excellency the expression of 
the profound and affectionate regard with which I remain your most 
obedient servant. 


Bolivar 


276 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

115. To General Jos£ de San Martin 
[Draft] 

Trujillo, August 23, 1821. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

My first thoughts on the field of Carabobo, as soon as I saw my 
country free, concerned Your Excellency, Peru, and your Army of 
Liberation. On reflecting that now no obstacle prevented me from 
hastening to extend my arms to the Liberator of South America, I 
was filled with pleasure. You must believe me: next to the welfare of 
Colombia, nothing occupies my mind so much as the success of Your 
Excellency's armies, which are so worthy of bearing your glorious 
standards wherever there are slaves who seek protection under their 
shadow. Heaven grant that the people of Peru may have no need of 
the Colombian army! But this army is on the march, filled with the 
certainty that, once it has been united with that of San Martin, the 
tyrants of America will not dare oppose it or even gaze upon it. 

I beg Your Excellency to accept with indulgence the sincere ex- 
pression of my admiration, which my first aide-de-camp, Colonel 
Ibarra, will have the honor of conveying to you. He is, in addition, 
the bearer of tidings of the greatest interest respecting the freedom 
of the New World. 

Accept the homage of high regard and respect with which I have 
the honor of being Your Excellency's most obedient servant. 

Bolivar 


116. To General Jos£ de San Martin 
[ Letterbook ] 

Trujillo, August 24, 1821. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

Following the destruction of the Spanish army, the oppressor of 
Venezuela, at Carabobo, and since its remnants have been reduced to 
the fortress of Puerto Cabello and are no longer capable of menacing 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


2 77 


the freedom and tranquility of the Republic over which I preside, I 
now have the satisfaction of informing Your Excellency that I am 
preparing to keep the promise that it was my pleasure to make from 
Pamplona in 1819, to go forward to embrace the Sons of the Sun. 1 

To this end, and with a view to requesting of you the facilities 
which I deem indispensable for transporting the army of Colombia 
and assuring its union with the army of Chile, which vou so worthily 
lead, I am taking the liberty of sending to Your Excellency my first 
aide-de-camp Colonel Diego Ibarra. He will have the honor of pre- 
senting this message to you, and of informing you by word of mouth 
of the plans that I have in mind for cooperating in the great enter- 
prise which Your Excellency has launched with so much glory. The 
verbal statements which my aide-de-camp Ibarra will make to you 
permit me to condense this communication. In this letter, therefore, 

I will not attempt fully to inform Your Excellency of the forces that 
comprise the army of Colombia, destined to aid the Liberator of 
Peru, of the preliminary operations that must be executed, or of the 
measures required for its transportation; in particular, it would be 
impossible to set forth herein the precise methods and time needed 
to effect our long desired union. Permit me, then, Your Excellency, 
to leave all of these details to my aide-de-camp Ibarra. He is thor- 
oughly familiar with my present plans and will be able to satisfy 
your interest with respect to any news or information you may de- 
sire. 

Since the main division of the army is now in Venezuela and its 
transportation overland is virtually impossible in view of the immense 
distance which separates us, I have determined to send it by sea, 
for the two-fold object of shortening its marches and of carrying out 
en route an important operation on the Isthmus of Panamd. If the 
situation in that province should permit our forces to occupy it at 
little cost and in short order, its occupation will be undertaken. But 
this will be done without prejudice to the principal object of the expe- 
dition, which is to cross the Isthmus and take possession of a suitable 
Pacific port. Here the Chilean fleet, with which Your Excellency has 
blockaded the enemy-held coasts of Peru, will be able to put in 
safely and take our troops aboard. I beg Your Excellency to heed 
with especial indulgence this portion of my aide-de-camp Ibarras 
mission. Without this cooperation on Your Excellency’s part, all my 
efforts to effect a union with you will be rendered hopeless and 


1 Sons of the Sun— the people of Pern (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


278 

useless. The expedition will be ready and will embark at Santa 
Marta during this coming month of October. 

In that same month it will arrive in Panama, and Your Excellency 
will appreciate the importance of our men not having to be detained 
in that murderous climate. On landing, more than four thousand 
men will make up this expedition j however great the losses, I expect 

4,000 soldiers, and Your Excellency must count on this number, to 
be waiting, in Panama or in some nearby port, for the squadron and 
transports which Your Excellency will provide. 

In addition to this division, the one now operating from Guaya- 
quil against Quito will also go to Pen! Today, it numbers over 3,000 
men, and it will constantly be receiving reinforcements. More than 

4.000 men, already en route, will embark at San Buenaventura and 
assemble in Guayaquil. While I have taken steps to arrange for the 
replacement of any losses that these three armies may suffer, it will 
be difficult for me to supply the new recruits with the necessary arms 
and equipment. Should Your Excellency have some two or three 
thousand extra muskets that you could send to me in Guayaquil, these 
replacements would add strength to the divisions. The army of 
Colombia, which I lead, would then number no less than 10,000 to 

12.000 men. 

Until I can again approach Your Excellency and have the pleasure 
of receiving precise information about your position, I feel that it is 
beside the point for me to venture any opinions concerning either the 
place which must be selected for our meeting or the operations which 
both armies should carry out in unison. Your Excellency will kindly 
arrange these matters with my aide-de-camp Ibarra and instruct me 
fully through him, or by such other means as Your Excellency deems 
advisable, on all that you may judge conducive to the success of the 
proposed plan. God keep you, etc. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


279 


117. To the President of the General Congress of Colombia 
[Gaceta de Colombia , November 24, 1822] 

Trujillo, August 26, 1821. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

Allow me for the first time to appeal to the generosity of the 
government of Colombia regarding a matter which concerns me per- 
sonally. 

In the year 1812, the treasonable act of Colonel Manuel Maria 
Casas, 1 then commander of La Guaira, placed that town and all our 
leaders and officers who had been attempting its evacuation in the 
hands of General Monteverde. I was not able to avoid the unhappy 
fate of being introduced to a tyrant as my companions-in-arms would 
not venture to join me either in castigating that traitor or in selling 
our lives dearly. I was presented to Monteverde by a man as generous 
as I was miserable. Don Francisco Iturbe presented me to the victor 
in the following manner: “This is the commander of Puerto Cabello, 
Sim6n Bolivar, for whom I have given my bond. If he is to be pun- 
ished, punish me instead. My life is pledged for his.” Can I forget 
a man of such magnanimous spirit? And can Colombia punish him 
without ingratitude? 2 * * * * * 8 

Don Francisco has emigrated, as a matter of honor, not out of 
enmity for the Republic. Yet, even were he an enemy, he has helped 
to free Colombia from its oppressors and has served humanity, while 
following his own convictions— no more. By adopting such men as 
Iturbe, Colombia takes to her bosom men of singular merit. 

If the properties of Francisco Iturbe must be confiscated, I pledge 
mine for his, even as he pledged his life for mine. And should the 
Sovereign Congress be willing to pardon him, I am the person who 
would be favored and my possessions would benefit. 

1 Many diversified currents played a part in the capitulation at La Guaira on 
July 30, 1812. Many of the revolution’s most distinguished officers wished to 
punish Miranda for the surrender, while others had sought to hold him to 

sign the capitulation; whereas Bolivar, on the other hand, wanted to place him- 

self at the head of the patriots and counter-attack the royalists. The military 

commander Casas, however, honestly favoring capitulation, believed that if he 

obeyed Monteverde's order to close the port, the Spaniards would live up to 

the terms of the agreement. After the heat of wartime passions subsided, 

Bolivar was friendly again to Casas in 1827 (comp.). 

8 See Docs. 6 and 7 (ed.). 


280 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


I beg Your Excellency to place this petition before the General 
Congress of Colombia, for that body kindly to render the judgment 
it shall deem proper. Most Excellent Sir. 

Sim6n Bolivar 


118. Pedro Briceno Mendez, Secretary-General, 
to Colonel Diego Ibarra 

[Letterbook] 

Maracaibo, September 7, 1821. 

From a letter just received, dated June 14, at the General Head- 
quarters of the Peruvian Army of Liberation, His Excellency the 
Liberator President has learned today that His Excellency General 
San Martin and the Spanish General La Serna have signed a treaty 
of armistice for sixteen months, providing for the proclamation and 
recognition of the independence of Peru and for the establishment 
of a provisional government until a final decision can be received 
from Spain; that country, moreover, is to send a member of her 
reigning house to occupy the throne of Peru. These, it appears, are 
the basic terms of the treaty. 

Although His Excellency the President assumes that His Excellency 
the Vice President of Cundinamarca 1 will have informed you in de- 
tail of these events, he has instructed me to report them to you again 
and to give you the following orders additional to your instructions : 2 

1. You are to proceed with the greatest circumspection until you 
have inquired as to the truth of this news and until you have been 
able to ascertain to what degree it is definite. You will then inform 
His Excellency in as thorough and detailed a manner as possible, in 
order that he can form an exact opinion of this negotiation, its begin- 
nings, present status, and probable results. 

2. If it should result that there is actually a treaty which includes 

1 Santander (ed.). 

3 Ibarra had been sent to Peru to negotiate with San Martin. See Doc. 116 
(ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 28 1 

the terms that are said to have been concluded, endeavor to discover 
and to determine the intentions of His Excellency General San 
Martin and try to persuade him to desist from the project of erecting 
a throne in Peru, because this project would shock every republic 
established on our continent, and because the proclamation of mo- 
narchial principles, when these countries have declared for republican 
principles, would create fresh schisms in his army and in that coun- 
try. Such a move would be a source of inspiration to the Spaniards to 
continue the war in all the insurgent states, for then they could al- 
ways rely upon the support of Peru and upon internal divisions, or 
attempt to persuade the other republics to follow suit; and, lastly, 
there is the danger of providing Europe with a pretext for interfering 
in our quarrel with Spain, and to attempt to decide it for us and to 
impose upon us the arbitrary law of the throne with its absolute 
power over the people. If, after you have explained all these reasons 
with any further clarification that your wisdom and knowledge may 
suggest, you have not succeeded in dissuading General San Martin 
from the plan in question, you will protest, in a positive and decisive 
manner, that Colombia does not agree to the plan, as it is counter 
to her institutions, to the object of her struggle, and to the urgent 
desires and wishes of her people for their freedom. 

3. That, in virtue of this news and that which has been received 
from the department of Quito, His Excellency intends to speed the 
preparation of the expedition and its operations. But you realize how 
important it is for His Excellency to know, in the shortest possible 
time, the outcome of your mission in order that he may know what 
to expect and be able to plan his subsequent movements. The addi- 
tion of this new affair— the treaty between the generals San Martin 
and La Serna— gives your mission a double significance, and the 
reports that you supply will be of the utmost importance. 

During the month of October, the expedition will be made ready 
and will leave from the port of assembly which you know, for its 
facilities grow and expand from day to day. 

God keep you, etc. 

PEDRO BR1CENO MENDEZ 

Addendum: Should you have occasion to treat with His Excellency 
the Supreme Director of Chile or should you think it desirable to 
advise him regarding the treaty that I have mentioned, you may send 
him this same protest in His Excellency's name, assuring him of 
Colombia's cooperation in resisting the project, in the event that it 


282 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


has been entered into in violation of the principles and sentiments 
of the Republic of Chile and her government. 


119. To Jos£ Maria del Castillo y Rada, 

Deputy to the Congress of CticuTA 

l Copy ] 

Maracaibo, September 16, 1821. 

My dear friend: 

I have received your worthy letter, delivered to me by my aide-de- 
camp Alvarez. In it I note with great pleasure that you wish to see 
me and that you believe my presence is needed there [Cucuta]. 
All of you have the same fears concerning the Republic. The Re- 
public can be governed perfectly well without me, provided the army 
defends it under my orders, that is, under the orders of any citizen 
who desires the country's freedom. I should like to believe, dear 
friend, that I have been indispensable in achieving what we have 
accomplished; but this reasoning does not prove that I am needed to 
accomplish that which still remains to be done. One man can lift 
the weight of many quintals, 1 but it does not follow that another 
cannot lift the weight of as many arrobas . 2 Such is the present case, 
my friend; and because of this fact I am resolved to set an example 
by a great republican act, in order that this act itself may serve as a 
guide for others. There is no agreement that the government should 
be in the hands of the most dangerous man, nor that public opinion 
and power should be controlled by those same hands, nor that all 
power should be centered in the government. It has never been 
agreed that the head of the armed forces should be the administrator 
of justice. The universal reaction would then be directed to such an 
individual, and, if he were overthrown, the entire government would 
be overthrown. There is less danger in having two sources of power 
than only one. And I must always be regarded as a power in this 
country, for I have a military command which, probably, I must 
retain. 


1 quintal — hundredweight (ed.). 

* arroba— twenty-five pounds (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


283 

All the world knows that I have enemies. Many think that I 
aspire to absolute power. Would it not be a great blow to the Re- 
public if the enmities and jealousies that conspire against me were 
to overthrow the government? So long as I command the army, 
Colombia will always have me in the reserve and the government 
in the vanguard. Should I suffer a defeat, the government will repair 
the loss. Let us suppose, on the other hand, that the head of the 
army were the head of the government. As he would take all the 
blows, he must eventually fall, carrying with him the destiny of 
society itself. 

These considerations are powerful, profound, and exact. Try to see 
into them and you will concur with my viewpoint. Then make the 
others understand this attitude so that all will agree with it. No one 
can tear from me my innermost conviction. And if they force the 
executive power upon me, I will refuse it. 

Please be good enough to inform Gual of this letter, which he also 
should read. I will write him a few lines only, in reply to his brief 
note. 

Tomorrow I leave for Santa Marta, determined to take Cartagena 
if I am able. After that I shall continue on my way, without ignoring 
the warnings you give me. Send me the money, which should come 
by way of Ocafia to Santa Marta. You may command your devoted 
friend, who is very sincerely yours. 

Bolivar 

P.S. You must not resign because your situation is not similar to mine. 


120. To Pedro Gual, Minister of Foreign Affairs 
[Blanco y Azpurua, VIII, 86] 

Maracaibo, September 16, 1821. 

My dear friend: 

I received with great pleasure your letter, which was delivered to 
me by aide-de-camp Alvarez. You call upon the gods to move me to 
go to Cucuta. To what purpose, when I have important expeditions 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


284 

afoot at a precious and singular moment? I know what I can do, my 
friend, and I know where I am useful. Persuade yourself that I am 
only fit for fighting, or, at best, for campaigning with soldiers and 
thus preventing others worse than I from leading them. All other 
abilities are but the illusions of my friends. Because they have seen 
me steer a boat in a tempest, they fancy that I can serve as an admiral 
of a fleet. Usually, in such cases, an ordinary pilot does better than 
an admiral, which has no bearing on the ability or position of either. 

You tell me that history will say magnificent things about me. I 
believe that it will record nothing greater than my disinterestedness 
in supreme power and my absolute devotion to arms, for the salva- 
tion of government and country. 

History will say: “Bolivar took the command in order to free his 
fellow-citizens, and, when they were free, he permitted them to 
govern themselves by laws, and not by his will.” This, Gual, is my 
reply; you will see the other reasons in my letter to the Vice-Presi- 
dent. 

It appears that the emancipation of America is being accomplished 
on all sides. It is reported that Iturbide entered Mexico City in 
June. San Martin must have entered Lima about the same time; 
consequently, it remains for me to finish what is yet to be done in 
Colombia before peace is concluded, so as to complete the emancipa- 
tion of the new continent. Judge, friend, if in these circumstances I 
should take time out and thus make it possible for some amateur 
to take possession of this vehicle of the Universe. . . . ! Do you be- 
lieve that there is anything more vital than this operation? What 
enemies has the Republic other than those that I seek? Were any 
elsewhere, would I not seek them out? You and the others have 
sought to frighten me with empty fears. I see no danger except on 
the borders. Only the godos are our enemies. The others are the 
enemies of General Bolivar, and one does not battle these— one 
must shun them to defeat them. I remain, sincerely, your devoted 

Bolivar 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 285 

121. To the President of the General Congress of Colombia 
[Blanco y Azpurua, VIII, 122] 

Rosario de Cucuta, October 1, 1821. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

Summoned by you to come and take the oath as president of the 
state, I have the honor of advising Your Excellency that I, with 
gratitude, have obeyed the will of the General Congress. But Your 
Excellency will have the kindness to submit the following consider- 
ations for the mature judgment of Congress before that body obli- 
gates me to accept a post which I have so often renounced. 

When public disasters forced me to take up arms to free my coun- 
try, I considered neither my strength nor my abilities. I yielded to 
the desperation of the spectacle of horror afforded by my enchained 
country, and, when I took charge of the military enterprises which 
have carried on the struggle for over eleven years, it was with no 
desire to take over the government but rather with the firm resolu- 
tion never to govern. I swore from the depths of my heart to be no 
more than a soldier, to serve only in war-time and in times of peace 
be a citizen. Although I was quick to sacrifice my possessions, my 
blood, and even my good name for the public good, I nevertheless 
cannot sacrifice my conscience: I am profoundly convinced of my 
incapacity to govern Colombia, as I know nothing about the nature 
of administration. I am not the statesman the Republic needs to 
insure its prosperity. I am a soldier by necessity and also by choice, 
and my path is marked out for me on the batdefield or in camp. A 
government office is a torture chamber for me. My natural inclina- 
tions drive me from it, and all the more so since I have nourished 
and strengthened these inclinations by every means within my 
power, in order to fortify myself against accepting a command that 
would be contrary to the cause of public well-being and even to my 
very honor. 

If, after this frank declaration, the General Congress persists in 
charging me with the executive power, I will accept only as an act 
of obedience; but, I protest, I will take the title of president only 
for the duration of the war and on condition that I be authorized 
to continue the campaign at the head of the army, leaving the actual 
governing of the state to His Excellency General Santander, who 
has so justly earned election by the General Congress to the office of 
vice president, and whose talents, virtues, zeal, and energy guarantee 


286 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


to the Republic that his administration will be completely successful. 

I have the honor to remain, with the highest esteem, Your Excel- 
lency's most devoted and obedient servant. 

Bolivar 


122. To General AgustIn de Iturbide 
[Letterbook] 

Rosario de Cucuta, October 10, 1821. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

The government and people of Colombia have followed with in- 
describable joy the victories of the armies that you are leading in 
the conquest of independence for the Mexican people. Your Ex- 
cellency, with prodigious fervor, has rekindled the sacred flame of 
liberty, which lay smouldering beneath the ashes of the ancient 
fires that once consumed that mighty empire. The Mexican people, 
ever in accord with the first principles of Nature, with Reason, and 
with the dictates of policy, have chosen not to remain foreign prop- 
erty but to become a nation in their own right. Since Mexico's for- 
tunes and good name made this imperative, Your Excellency has 
fulfilled the nation's destiny. If her sacrifices have been many, greater 
now is the recompense in happiness and honor. 

I pray that Your Excellency will kindly accept, in the same spirit 
of cordiality and sincerity with which I address you, this message 
whose sole object is to convey to Your Excellency and your brothers 
in Mexico the delight of all Colombia. 

Santamana, a member of the General Congress and plenipoten- 
tiary to the government of Mexico, will have the honor of conveying 
to you, together with this letter, the sincere expression of admiration 
and high esteem that the heroism of a great man inspires in me. 

I dare to hope that Your Excellency, animated by your high prin- 
ciples and by the sincere desires of your generous heart, will make it 
possible for Colombia and Mexico to appear before all the world 
hand in hand, and, what is more, one at heart. 

Fate has united us in misfortune; valor in purpose; and Nature 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 287 

has endowed us with a similarity of character that we may become 
brothers. 

Please accept the most sincere testimonial of the high sentiments 
with which I remain, with the greatest esteem and respect, your 
obedient servant. 


123. To General Jos£ de San Martin 
[Letterbook] 

Bogotd, November 16, 1821. 

The recent unpleasant incident in Guayaquil, in which our enemies 
obtained some advantages, calls for prompt and effective counter- 
measures. The government of Colombia is taking vigorous steps to 
insure the absolute security of that province and to free the provinces 
to the south that yet remain in subjection. I am marching an army 
to carry out this operation; meanwhile, another division is march- 
ing to occupy the Isthmus of Panamd. 

If, while I am on the march, Your Excellency were to send the 
battalion headed by Colonel Heres against Guayaquil, Your Excel- 
lency would not only fulfill the desires of those Colombians but 
you would render this Republic a most signal service as well. How- 
ever, if this battalion has already marched to Upper Peru, I take the 
liberty of making the same request of Your Excellency respecting 
any other troops that can be sent to Guayaquil. These, united with 
the Colombian division already there, can oppose any fresh efforts 
the enemy may make to extend his conquests. 

The liberation of the southern provinces of Colombia and the 
complete expulsion of the enemies who remain in South America 
are today all the more urgent, inasmuch as events in Mexico are 
about to give a new turn to the American revolution. According to 
the latest advices reaching us, General Iturbide and the new viceroy, 
General O’Donoju, concluded a treaty on September 24 of this year, 
which among other things provides that Ferdinand VII shall come 
to Mexico, where he, independent of Spain and of every other 
power, will assume the title of emperor; that the city of Mexico 


288 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


shall be evacuated by the royalist forces and occupied by General 
Iturbide and the imperial troops; and that an armistice is to prevail 
during the interim. This development was prepared by General Itur- 
bide in advance, pursuant to the plan that he made public, a copy of 
which I am enclosing for Your Excellency. 

This new order of things leads me to believe, and on good grounds, 
that, should the Spanish Cabinet approve the treaty made in Mexico 
by Generals Iturbide and O’Donoju, and should Ferdinand VII or 
any other European prince establish himself there, similar claims, re- 
questing the termination of Spains differences on the same principles 
as those applied in Mexico, will be made on all the other free gov- 
ernments of America. 

Should such European princes brought to the New World have 
the support of the Emperors of the Old, they will be able to cause 
a radical change in the interests of, and in the methods pursued by, 
the governments of America. I therefore believe that it is now, more 
than ever before, absolutely necessary to complete the expulsion of 
the Spaniards from every part of the continent. We must join in a 
league and provide ourselves with mutual guarantees in order to 
combat these new enemies and any new devices that they may seek 
to employ. The government of Colombia will send an envoy to Your 
Excellency to discuss this vital matter. 

God keep you many years. 


1822 


124. To [General Bernardo O’Higgins], 

Supreme Director of Chile 

[Copy] 1 

General Headquarters, Caly, January 8, 1822. 

Very Excellent Sir: 

Of all the bright epochs in the history of the American nations 
none is so glorious as the present. During this epoch the dominions 
of the New World have thrown off the chains with which cruel 
Spain, from another hemisphere, had bound them. They have re- 
gained their freedom and established their own national existence. 
But America’s greatest day has not yet dawned. We have indeed 
driven out our oppressors, smashed the tablets of their tyrannical 
laws, and established legitimate institutions; but we have yet to lay 
the foundation of the pact of union that will make of this part of 
the world a nation of republics. 

Your Excellency, standing at the head of Chile, has been ordained 
by a benevolent destiny to seal by your hand the eternal freedom 
and welfare of America. Your Excellency is the man to whom your 
great nation, in her remotest posterity, will owe not only her political 
origin but also her social unity and domestic tranquility. 

The union of the five great states of America is, itself, so sublime 
that I do not doubt but that it will come to be the cause of amaze- 
ment in Europe. The imagination cannot conceive without admira- 
tion the magnitude of such a colossus which, like Homer’s Jupiter, 
will cause the earth to quake with a glance. Who shall oppose an 
America united in heart, subject to one law, and guided by the torch 
of liberty? Such is the objective which the government of Colombia 
contemplates in appointing to Your Excellency, as its Minister Pleni- 
potentiary, Senator Joaquin Mosquera. 

Have the kindness to receive this mission in all amity. It is the 


1 Taken from J. D. Monsalve, El Ideal Politico del Libertador 0916), p. 199 
(comp.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


290 

expression of Americas interest. It promises to be the salvation of 
the New World. 

Accept, Your Excellency, the expression of high esteem wherewith 
I have the honor to be Your Excellency’s obedient servant. 

BoLfvAR 


125. To Lord Thomas Cochrane, Admiral 
of the Chilean Navy 

[Draft] 

Popayan, February 13, 1822. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

I have come south in order to end the war in Colombia. A part of 
the forces which I sent to the Isthmus should contribute to the 
success of this campaign. My aide-de-camp Captain O’Leary is com- 
missioned to issue and carry out any orders necessary to that opera- 
tion; further, he is to inform you how gratified the Colombian 
government would be if Your Excellency, with the naval forces 
under your command, would cooperate with it. If Your Excellency 
were to destroy the few remaining Spanish naval forces in the 
Pacific, our communications with the governments to the north and 
south would be completely unimpeded, and our military operations 
could be performed expeditiously and without any obstacle whatso- 
ever. 

My aide-de-camp O’Leary is instructed to discuss with Your Ex- 
cellency the importance of this operation and to convey my compli- 
ments to Your Excellency for the distinguished services that you 
have so generously rendered the American cause. 


BOLfVAR 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


29I 


126. To Salvador Jimenez, Bishop of Popayan 
[Gaceta de Colombia, July 21, 1822] 

Pasto, June 10, 1822, 


Very Reverend Sir: 


I have the honor of replying to Your Reverence’s esteemed letter 
which was delivered to me just prior to my entrance into this city 
the day before yesterday, through the kindness of F61ix Linan y 

Haro, Secretary of the Bishopric. , 

It is indeed with great pleasure that I receive Your Reverence s 
expressions of consideration and regard for my person and the candid 
and generous professions with which you disclose the depths of your 
heart and your religious and political convictions. The French are 
not the only people who have respected and even admired firm, loyal, 
and heroic enemies. History, which teaches all things, offers remark- 
able instances of the high veneration inspired in all ages by men of 
integrity who, rising above every danger, have maintained their 
dignity of character before the crudest of conquerors, even thoug 
they trod the precincts of the Temple of Death. I am the first, Very 
Reverend Sir, to do homage to all those celebrated personages who 
pursued to the end the paths that Providence had marked out tor 
them. But I do not know whether or not all men can attempt a 
similar line of conduct, when the bases differ. The world is one 
thing, religion another. Secular heroism is not always the heroism of 
virtue and of religion. The noble warrior, daring and fearless, stands 
out in sharpest contrast to the shepherd of souls. Caton, and Socrates 
himself, the highest embodiments of pagan ethics, cannot serve as 
models for the princes of our holy religion. For this reason, Very 
Reverend Sir, I dare to believe that Your Reverence, far from con- 
ducting the course of your religious career within the confines of 
duty, has notably departed from it by abandoning the Church, which 
Heaven entrusted to you, for political pursuits totally unrelated to 


the vineyards of the Lord. . , , 

On the other hand, Very Reverend Sir, I should like to think that 
Your Reverence was moved by strong and weighty reasons in or- 
phaning your gentle flock in Popaydn; but I cannot believe Your 
Reverence will remain deaf to the bleating of those bereaved lambs 
and to the voice of the government of Colombia, which implore Your 
Reverence to help lead them upon the path of Heaven Your Rever- 
ence should take into consideration the number of faithful Chnstians 


292 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

and gentle innocents who will fail to receive the sacrament of con- 
firmation because of Your Reverence’s action, and how many young 
disciples of the faith will not be invested with the august character of 
ministers of the Lord should Your Reverence fail to consecrate their 
call to the altar and to the profession of the Holy Truth. Your Rever- 
ence knows that the people of Colombia are in need of curators of 
the soul and that the war has deprived them of the divine ministra- 
tion for want of priests. So long as His Holiness does not recognize 
the political and religious existence of the Colombian nation, our 
church will need the very illustrious bishops who now console her 
during this period of orphanage, in order that they, in part, can 
su Pply this mortal want. 

Your Reverence must know that such a violent separation [of 
church and state] in this hemisphere would diminish the uni- 
versality of the Church of Rome and that the responsibility for this 
terrible separation would fall particularly upon those who, though 
able to maintain the unity of the Church of Rome, have, by their 
negative conduct, hastened the greatest of evils, namely, the ruin of 
the Church and the death of souls through all eternity. 

I flatter myself that Your Reverence, after considering what has 
herein been expressed, will deign to answer my fervent prayer and 
accept the sincere sentiments of veneration with which I remain your 
very obedient servant. 

Bolivar 


127. To General Jos£ de San Martin 
[Copy] 

Quito, June 17, 1822. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

I arrived in this capital following the victories won by the armies 
of Pern and Colombia on the fields of Bombona and Pichincha. I 
take great pleasure in informing Your Excellency of the most sincere 
sentiments of gratitude with which the people and government of 
Colombia have welcomed the glorious liberators of Peru. They have 



BOMBONA CAMPAIGN 
1822 
SCALE 


S JO 15 20 29 30 36 40 K 
I I I ~ ~ — L ~ * 


legend: 

Bolivar's Route 


Patriot Royalist fcBBI 

Vicente Lecuna. 


1 ® 


. 




SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


*93 


arrived, bearing their victorious arms, ready to lend their powerful 
support to the campaign which has already freed three provinces in 
the south of Colombia, as well as this great capital, so deserving of 
the protection of all America for having been among the first to 
set the heroic example of freedom. But our tribute of gratitude is no 
mere homage paid to the government and army of Peru. It is the 
expression of our strong desire to lend a similar and even greater 
assistance to the government of Peru, unless, by the time this dis- 
patch reaches Your Excellency, the liberating armies of South 
America have already gloriously terminated the campaign which was 
to begin this season. 

It affords me great satisfaction to infrom Your Excellency that the 
war in Colombia is ended; that her army is prepared to march 
wherever their brothers may call them, most particularly to the land 
of our neighbors to the south, who have so many claims upon our 
preference as our closest friends and brothers-in-arms. 

Accept, Your Excellency, the sentiments of profound esteem 
wherewith I remain Your Excellency’s devoted and obedient servant. 

Bolivar 


128. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Colombia 

[Original] 

Guayaquil, August 27, 1822. 

My dear General: 

At this moment Colonel Garcia, Pulido, and several others who 
have retired from the service are about to leave for your parts. Inas- 
much as Colonel Garcia is going to Bogotd, he may have to call upon 
you for some favor, and I accordingly commend him to you for his 
good services. I believe Pulido needs no such recommendation, as he 
is going home— though his home is in ruins. 

All goes well here, although everything is made miserable by the 
enormous expenditures necessitated by the prisoners, the expeditions 


294 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


to Perd and Colombia, and the outfitting and the paying of the troops 
that remain. Five hundered thousand pesos more are yet to be paid on 
past debts, and another five hundred thousand pesos for the yearly 
payroll of the southern army. You should know what the rest of the 
Republic is contributing, and on that basis you can estimate whether 
or not these provinces can provide sufficient funds to take care of 
these heavy requirements. You can have no idea of the high prices 
in the south, caused by the scarcity of everything. In Quito, the 
troops purchase provisions at very high prices, and here everything 
is the same as in Peru, except for rice and plantains which, fortu- 
nately, are cheap. In Quito, officers' uniforms cost a fortune, and 
here every step is measured in gold. I have had no unusual expendi- 
tures with the exception of the dinner for San Martin, and yet I 
have spent eight thousand pesos. I tell you all this in order that you 
will understand that nothing can be sent from here unless the troops 
in Quito and Cuenca are first withdrawn. Those in this city defi- 
nitely cannot be moved, as 600 men do not suffice to man the garri- 
son. 

General Salom is going mad [estd loco ] with his assignment as in- 
tendant of Guayaquil, but I have no confidence in anyone else for 
that post. I therefore urge you to find a good intendant for this de- 
partment, a civilian if at all possible, as the martial spirit is not in 
favor here. Salom says he would rather die than remain in this post. 
And so I recommend that you find a man as stable as Salom to take 
his place. Have him come quickly, for Salom wishes to go with me. 
You well realize that only Sucre and Salom are capable of governing 
these departments: in other words, the only ones capable of govern- 
ing that I know in these parts. This is a very fine assignment and 
only a Salom would relinquish it. The countryside is pleasant, con- 
tented, rich, and fertile; it has no defects. To my way of thinking, 
this is the finest province in all Colombia, barring none. Caracas 
itself falls short of Guayaquil, as the earthquakes there are intoler- 
able and the people even more so. Here the houses are made of wood 
and will not topple over, while the people are extremely good-natured. 

On the first of next month I shall go to Cuenca, and within the 
next forty days I shall return by way of Loja and Tumbez. From here 
I shall then go on to Quito. 

A vessel that arrived from Lima [sic ] 1 yesterday brought news that 
nothing new has occurred, that everything has been quiet following 


1 Callao is the port for Lima (ed.). 


80 0«»t« d* Qr««nwich 


PICHINCHA 

CAMPAIGN 

1822 

SCALE 


70 * 


BATTLE OP PICHINCHA 
Scale .'i «1 

T , 





SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


295 

the fall of the minister Monteagudo, that the enemy has not moved, 
and that San Martin had not yet arrived. 

In a Misceldnea from Panamd, I have seen the petition that was 
addressed to the British government regarding our ships, as well as 
the ministry's reply, with some remarks by the Marquess of London- 
derry 1 concerning the recognition of the American republics. Every- 
thing points to our being recognized by Great Britain in the very 
near future. I very much like the manner in which the Minister 
replied, for he clearly indicates that he recognizes our government de 
facto , and will later recognize it de jure: which by good logic amounts 
to the same thing in different words. I can say the same respecting 
Spain: we may consider our independence recognized, for they now 
refer to us as a government, whereas previously they referred to us 
as the rebel colonies which was a song in a different key. 

I repeat that I shall not go south until I have word of the favor- 
able outcome of the Peruvian campaign, and when I do go I shall 
not take charge of the executive power. I repeat this in order that you 
can make your plans and to enable you to so inform the Congress 
when it convenes. Do still more: convince all of its members that I 
shall not go to Bogotd if they insist that I stay on as president, and 
that, if they summon me, I shall not obey. You know that I accepted 
the presidency only to induce you to become vice president; and, as 
I did not then know your decision, I resolved to go to Cucuta to pave 
the way. If the gentlemen of the Congress want you to be president, 
let them elect you. If they do not want you to govern, let them elect 
another, for I shall never take the office. Let me say further that I 
shall not do so because our Constitution and many of our laws do not 
appear right to me. But, even if the Constitution and the laws were 
to be amended, I would not take the supreme command as I would 
not have my acceptance attributed to ambition, and, moreover, I want 
a rest after twelve years of strife. Two-thirds of my life are already 
past, and I should like to devote the remaining third to the cultiva- 
tion of my soul and reputation, for I must account to God and to 
the world for my past life. I do not wish to die until my accounts 
have been put in order. Let every citizen serve his country for twelve 
years, and then I will be willing to serve again, but not before. I 
was not born a slave, and I have made it clear that I want to be a 
citizen in order to be free. 

I am your most affectionate and devoted 

BolIvar 


1 Castlereagh (ed.). 


2 9^ SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

129. To General Bernardo O'Higgins, Supreme 
Director of Chile 

[Draft] 


Guayaquil, August 29, 1822. 

Honored Sir: 

It gives me great pleasure to address Your Excellency personally in 
order to express to you my cordial and sincere feelings of admiration 
and esteem for your person. I have long wished to congratulate Your 
Excellency upon the prosperous and glorious success with which 
fortune, valor, and prudence have favored the operations of the 
government over which Your Excellency so meritoriously presides. 
There could be no better opportunity than the present to gratify 
this desire, for Your Excellency, crowning the glory of your political 
career, has just returned to the people the full exercise of their 
powers. The proclamation that Your Excellency has issued to the 
citizens of Chile is the most liberal and the most fitting for a people 
aspiring to a maximum of freedom. Your Excellency in no way limits 
the nation s representatives, who from the outset will exercise an 
independence which, without doubt, will be applauded by the very 
enemies of our cause themselves and by our magistrates. 

The Chilean people are good, patriotic, and valorous, and by virtue 
of these noble attributes they have every right to entertain the high- 
est hopes for their national welfare and achievement. Your people 
will be the last to adopt the constitutional system. The good fortune 
of being last affords them the great advantage of seeing in advance 
the pitfalls to be avoided and the examples to be followed. The 
history of America s trials and errors is an open book for those who 
know how to read it. Your Excellency will doubtless briefly describe 
our vicissitudes to the people of Chile so that they will not fall from 
the same heights from which all our legislative efforts have been 
dashed to bits. Chile will prosper if she erects a strong governmental 
structure upon liberal principles. I need not, I am sure, state my 
views on this subject at greater length, since I have expressed them 
in all solemnity to the Congress of Venezuela, and I understand that 
they are known in your capital. 

At no other time could the gathering of the representatives of your 
state be of greater importance than at this moment. In the ac- 
companying newspaper Your Excellency will note the accusations 
that have been directed against you by the agents of the Spanish 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


297 


government in order to delay recognition of our independence. It 
is true that the libel is patent throughout the Spanish Ministers 
descriptions of the American situation. But it should be most gratify- 
ing to us to be able to refute that libel with glowing examples like 
the one that is now the object of my congratulations to Your Ex- 
cellency. 

I shall be very grateful if our correspondence can be as frequent 
as possible and marked by that sincerity and candor so necessary to 
unite comrades-in-arms and kindred spirits. For my part, I offer Your 
Excellency the sentiments of a true friendship and the tribute of an 
admiration that is inspired in me by the exalted qualities which dis- 
tinguish Your Excellency. 

I trust that Mosquera, our envoy, has had the honor of submitting 
to Your Excellency our ideas on American unity. I also trust that 
Your Excellency, imbued with the same sentiments as are the Pro- 
tectors of Peru and of Colombia, will gladly agree to the pact of 
mutual assistance, which we have already begun to implement be- 
tween Peru and ourselves. 

Kindly accept the sincere expression of the esteem with which I 
am Your Excellency’s most affectionate and obedient servant. 

Bolivar 


130. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Colombia 

[Original] 

Cuenca, September 14, 1822. 

My dear General: 

Today I saw a letter from General Santa Cruz, dated at Piura, to 
Colonel Heres, in which the General stated that he would march 
toward Lima, though this was litde to his liking, as the situation there 
promised neither safety nor tranquility; that the Protector 1 had taken 
over the supreme command upon his arrival in Lima, after arranging 


1 San Martin (ed.). 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


298 

the resignation of the Marquis de Torre Tagle; and that Monteagudo 
was probably not far from Callao. He added that the Protector had 
very badly received the popular assembly and that the Protector had 
intimidated those who took part in it. The General stated further 
that they were awaiting only the arrival of our reinforcements in 
Callao in order to seize Arica promptly; and that many of those 
who had avowed opposition to Monteagudo would participate in the 
expedition. 

The same writer stated in another letter that the Protector had 
spoken to him personally and had praised his comrade, meaning me; 
that Monteagudo had been imprisoned as a thief and a promoter of 
monarchy, which is detested in Pern. It is generally said, he added, 
that the Minister of the Treasury and the Commander of the Navy 
were also implicated and that Torre Tagle favored the peoples 
proclamation. This letter is of earlier date than the first; hence, 
you must judge the relative significance of his statements. It is my 
belief that General San Martin has taken the bit in his teeth and 
means to gain his ends as Iturbide gained his: that is to say, by force. 
We shall thus have on our flanks two kingdoms which will end as 
wretchedly as they have begun. I only hope that neither the one nor 
the other loses its territory while dreaming about thrones. 

General San Martin is reported to have received a friendly and 
enthusiastic reception in Lima. There is nothing strange in this for 
a thousand reasons, though in reality he is not popular in that coun- 
try, as was evident in Guayaquil, where the people, although they 
received him well, rendered him lip service only. 

For the rest, all that we know of Peru is that the enemy has taken 
up his position and has ordered several parties to approach the capital 
from the coast. You will learn additional news from the newspapers 
which I am sending. 

I am your devoted 


BOLIVAR 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


299 


131. To General Jos£ de La Mar, President of Per6 

[Copy] 

Loja, October 14, 1822. 

Confidential. 

My esteemed friend: 

It was with the greatest satisfaction that I learned that you head 
the executive power in Peru. The loss of General San Martin can 
be repaired only by yourself and General Alvarado. You may well 
believe that the pleasure which the wisdom of the Congress has given 
me has been lessened by the sudden departure of the Protector. The 
usefulness of public men is in proportion to the opinion in which 
they are held. 

General San Martin was respected by an army long accustomed 
to obeying him. The people of Peru saw him as their liberator. He, 
on the other hand, had been fortunate; and you know that illusions 
created by good fortune are sometimes worth more than merit. How- 
ever, my friend, Peru has lost a good captain and a benefactor. But 
she can console herself with the thought that her Congress is guided 
by wisdom, for it has taken such pains in its appointments that these 
have fallen to two great men. I am delighted, my dear General, to 
learn that you are the new head of the administration. Respecting 
these sentiments, General Castillo will have given you convincing 
proof. I foresaw that you would have to replace the Protector from 
the time when I had the good fortune of meeting him in Guayaquil. 
He appeared to me to be far from desirous of continuing in com- 
mand; and I accordingly adjudged it a stroke of fortune that brought 
you to Peru to succeed him. I bore in mind that the votes of the 
Congress might be divided between General Alvarado and yourself. 
Nevertheless, I also realized that General Alvarado would promptly 
be called upon to direct the military operations, as he has been a 
comrade-in-arms to all the commanders and officers of your allied 
army; moreover, you share many other outstanding qualities that are 
needed by any man called upon to direct a state amidst the convul- 
sions of war and revolution. Please, dear friend, accept my cordial 
felicitations. 

You may count upon all that is within my power to help you com- 
plete your term of office with success and glory. In this respect, I 
think I am especially fortunate; yet in my heart I cannot but sympa- 
thize with you over the many troubles that await you, in having to 


300 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

cope with the perplexities of conflicting passions and the avalanche 
of obstacles that the revolution creates as it progresses. Notwithstand- 
ing all these melancholy thoughts, you must not be dismayed, as 
fortunately you find yourself placed in a position to round out a 
glorious career. You are a veteran at exercising command. Your head 
is crowned with laurels and with wise, just, and liberal ideas. You 
are not a prey to motives of self-interest; no external party pressure 
accosts you; no personal gain excites your ambition; you do not fear 
death; and you love freedom devotedly. Few men can merit this 
eulogy. 

I am very sorry to have to mention in passing that the press in 
Lima does not treat me as well as ordinary decency would seem to 
require. Let us suppose that my conduct, or that of the government, 
is not what it should be. This, however, is not sufficient reason for 
friendly nations to indulge in mutual recriminations for their faults. 
Colombia may have looked with disapproval upon certain actions of 
American governments, but she has abstained from finding fault, 
as her government has undertaken to discourage the use of a weapon 
that everyone is not capable of wielding wisely and well. I trust that 
you, my friend, will stop the abuse of which I am the object, so that 
I will not be compelled to give General Paz Castillo orders that I 
should find truly distasteful. It is not proper that Colombia s modera- 
tion be rewarded with insults. This is neither the time nor the place 
to bring up other matters, but you will permit me to say that I am 
most eager to have the Congress definitely authorize the executive 
power to negotiate with Colombia respecting the matter of bounda- 
ries. Now that we are friends, it would be well if we were to deter- 
mine our borders to avoid misunderstanding, conflict, and possible 
future war. You will confer a great good on both Peru and Colombia 
if you will lay the foundation of their friendship. 

Accept the sentiments of high esteem with which I am your de- 
voted servant. 


Bolivar 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


301 


132. To General Jos£ de La Mar, President of Peru 1 

l Copy ] 

Cuenca, October 28, 1822. 

My dear friend and President: 

I have received no letter from you in the post from Peru, but I am 
nevertheless writing you in order to lose no time, considering what I 
have been able to gather from the correspondence that I have recently 
received from Lima by way of Guayaquil. These communications 
are from our Colombian commanders and officers, but there are none 
from the government or from you. I will begin by saying that I am 
greatly disturbed by the fate of Peru; for it is very possible that the 
enemy will attack and even occupy Lima, to the great detriment of 
her interests and the ruination of her inhabitants. Or, perhaps, the 
enemy will unite his forces to attack General Alvarado in order to 
accomplish the destruction of that fine army. At any rate, I fear the 
worst, perhaps because my reasoning is influenced by my great inter- 
est in our cause but also because the enemy is said to be strong, capa- 
ble, and bold. What reassures me, however, is the fact that you head 
the government and our army in Lima. 

I frankly confess that I place great trust in you; moreover, I believe 
that you do not need my counsel. But I do feel that I may inform you 
of my thoughts respecting what I would do in your case, if I were 
attacked in Lima by an enemy with superior forces. I would not be 
moved by vainglory, nor would I heed the clamors of the populace: 
I would concentrate on countering the enemy’s operations, insure 
those of our own in the north and in the south, and await the rein- 
forcements from Colombia in order to eliminate all risk and make 
victory certain. To this end I would place in Callao a small garrison 
well equipped with provisions and supplies, staffed with determined, 
even foolhardy officers, with veterans unfit for campaign duty, and 
with those civilians and patriots most devoted to the cause of America 
and strong enough to endure the rigors of a siege. For a commander 
I would choose the best of our officers, one noted more for his cour- 
age, tenacity, and patriotism than for his wisdom. Above all, I would 
leave in Callao all the provisions possible, and only the minimum 
number of men necessary. Then, I would evacuate the city without 

1 During this period, Peru was actually governed by a junta comprising 
General Jos6 de La Mar, President, Felipe Antonio Alvarado, and Manuel 
Salazar y Baquijano, Count of Vista Florida (comp.). 


3°2 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


a word to anyone and proceed northward in order to draw the enemy 
in that direction and lure him as far as possible from Lima, and so 
from Cuzco. I would not engage in any action until I had doubled 
my force with that which would immediately come from Colombia 
to complete that number. Such a move would accomplish the follow- 
ing: first, the future of Peru would be assured; second, General Al- 
varado would have time to prepare for victory, to repair his losses, and 
to increase his forces; third, you could tranquilly await the arrival of 
the Colombian reinforcements in order to destroy the enemy; fourth, 
Lima would be freed of the enemy troops, which would be drawn 
toward the north; fifth, as no risks would have been taken, the out- 
come would be assured. I know, dear friend, that all this presents 
difficulties, but it has no dangers. You will thereby avoid endanger- 
ing the forces that you have in Lima, and I will bring an additional 
6,000 men to outnumber those of the enemy. You would then be- 
come the savior of Peru. You would place the enemy between two 
forces superior to his own; for General Alvarado, too, will have in- 
creased his army, having disposed of Canteracs forces, which, it 
would appear, are the source of danger; while we will assuredly de- 
stroy any forces that oppose us. You can count upon me and upon 
Colombia to execute this plan. We will do our part faithfully. On the 
other hand, if the division in Lima should be lost, we would probably 
lose the provinces of northern Peru. I would then find myself with no 
base of operations, no resources, no support, and in a region that is 
unknown to me, and which is largely desert and probably in ruins. 
The enemy would be strong and we weak, and, in the end, every 
advantage would be turned to our disadvantage. What such a catas- 
trophe would mean you can appreciate with greater force than I, 
as the responsibility is yours and you can estimate those factors more 
accurately than I. In the final analysis, my friend, what I can offer 
you is to assist Peru as far as I am able. I very much fear, however, 
that I could do little if the Lima division and the northern provinces 
were lost, for in that case things would be in a horrible state indeed. 

I have not yet received any reply from your government concern- 
ing my offer of 4,000 men, although I should have received it by 
now. There is said to be some hesitancy on account of the talk against 
me which is prevalent in your country. Also, I am expecting news 
from Bogotd which will confirm or deny the rumor that Calzada has 
reached the Orinoco with 1,500 men from Puerto Rico and that a 
strong expedition from Havana has moved on Panamd. Unfortu- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


303 


nately, mail for me has gone to Guayaquil and will still go on to Loja, 
where I stayed. 

Our officers and commanders have been complaining bitterly of all 
that they have had to endure from the time of embarkation to the 
present. Word of this, having reached our military aids, diminishes 
the enthusiasm of those who should be going. Taking all these factors 
into consideration, I am unable to tell you exactly when our troops 
will start for Peru. Meanwhile, I am making preparations in order 
to live up to my promise without fail if you adopt the measures that 
I have proposed in confidence. I am expecting your reply by return 
post. 

I remain, with the greatest esteem, your obedient servant. 

Bolivar 


133. Jos£ Gabriel P£rez, Secretary-General, 
to General Juan Paz del Castillo 

[L etterbook] 

Quito, November 15, 1822. 

On September 9, His Excellency the Liberator took occasion to 
promise the Peruvian government additional reinforcements of four 
thousand men and to set forth his ideas in the event that the Peru- 
vian armies should not be victorious in the present campaign. 1 As 
yet the government of Peru has not given His Excellency the Libera- 
tor the slightest acknowledgment of his generous offer. His Excel- 
lency knows only by way of private communications and reports that 
the sincerity of his offer has been questioned, more credence being 
given to the word of impostors than to the Liberators unimpeachable 
reputation. It would appear either that the state of Peru has other 
forces upon which she can rely or that she has chosen to see her lib- 
erty and the division of Colombian troops demolished simultaneously. 

The Liberator, in making this offer of additional aid, has heeded 
his love of liberty and of the Peruvian people more than the interests 


x See Doc. 153 (ed.). 


304 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


of Colombia. He was resolved to make good his promise at any cost, 
though it will undoubtedly mean great sacrifices on the part of Co- 
lombia. Notwithstanding, the Liberator, in order to further the liberty 
of our neighbors, would strongly have aided your state. However, in 
view of the fact that to date he has received no reply to his note of 
September 9, and as it appears that the sincerity of his motives has 
been questioned, His Excellency must take measures to save our di- 
vision in Peru from destruction; he therefore wishes to caution you: 

That the Colombian division is, under no circumstances, to be used 
in any engagement unless there is good probability of success, or at 
least unless there is absolute equality of forces, in terms of quality of 
troops, arms, and advantages in the opposing positions; that, in case 
of a reverse, or in case it is held inadvisable to engage the Colombian 
division for the aforementioned reasons, you will have it fall back 
toward our southern area, employing every possible means and pre- 
caution to insure its safety. 

Should the government of Peru wish to employ the Colombian di- 
vision against either unequal or superior forces, or in the event you 
are asked that it not be engaged, you will refrain from using it. You 
will inform the Peruvian government of this order. You will appreci- 
ate the just reasons which Colombia possesses in adopting this policy, 
for you are aware of the rejection implied by the failure to reply in 
time to her offers, thereby permitting precious moments to be lost 
which might have been used to prepare for the march and to forestall 
evils which will later prove beyond remedy. 

Pursuant to his offers, His Excellency the Liberator took the requi- 
site steps here to effectuate them; and, although due to local events it 
might not have been possible to send the entire contingent offered, a 
considerable body of reinforcements would have marched, which, 
added to our division and the Peruvian troops, could have opposed 
and possibly destroyed the enemy, thereby completing the liberation 
of Peru. 

The silence of your government is equivalent to a refusal. Colom- 
bia therefore cannot and must not allow her division in Peru to per- 
ish simply because she has not been able to relieve it as effectively 
and promptly as she might have wished. You are to see to the faithful 
execution of this order. 

God keep you, etc. 


JOS£ GABRIEL PEREZ 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


305 


134. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Colombia 

[ Original ] 

Ibarra, December 23, 1822. 

My dear General: 

After dispatching the Bogota battalion to General Sucre, I went 
to Otavalo; I then came here with the intention of placing myself 
nearer to Pasto and of being closer at hand to direct General Sucre. 
Today he probably attacked the yastusos with nearly 2,000 men un- 
der his command, although one-third are militia. There is no doubt 
but that the outcome will be favorable despite the fact that the Gu&i- 
tara positions constitute a menace capable of withstanding all comers. 
I have not gone to direct these military operations myself out of defer- 
ence to General Sucre. He does not deserve such an affront, since 
he is quite capable of commanding troops in the field. He has no lack 
of talent, judgment, energy, zeal, and valor, which, indeed, are more 
virtues than I can claim for myself. 

After Christmas I intend to go to Pasto to explain my views respect- 
ing peace terms. This task is a most difficult one, as it requires a great 
deal of tact, which I have heretofore failed to display with either 
the pastusos or the people of Coro and Ocana. I am going to experi- 
ment with a milder approach than that used at La Cienaga with the 
Rifles, effective though that was at the time. 

After this peace mission I do not yet know what I shall do as I may 
have to move from pillar to post. For one thing, I do not know how 
you and the others regard Morales; moreover, I know of absolutely 
nothing except for General Clementes success in the Guajira [penin- 
sula], of which you wrote me in your English letter. This lack of in- 
formation keeps me in a state of anxiety that you can well imagine, 
especially as I do not know when I can expect to be enlightened. In 
Pasto I shall probably hear something that will determine whether 
I should march north or south. There the mail from Lima will reach 
me, giving the latest news of the state of the war in that country. You 
may wonder why I am so uneasy about the south: I fear Canterac 
more than Morales, and, though Venezuela, my homeland, is the 
scene of many calamities, I am more concerned over the defeats of 
the Peruvians than our own. Respecting enemy victories in any re- 
gion, I am of the opinion that those in the south are more to be 
dreaded than those in the north. You have no idea what obstacles 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


306 

this country offers to waging war. If it is attempted in Peru, the 
deserts and transportation conditions will render it altogether impossi- 
ble; and if in Quito, we shall have to reckon with the pastusos and 
the patianos to our rear, for they will create every possible obstacle 
and will definitely cut off our retreat with great trenches and walls 
higher and heavier than those of Babylon, and perhaps as mighty as 
those scaled by the Titans. In short, my friend, though these dangers 
are far removed, I am constantly visualizing them, the better some 
day to avoid them. These circumstances leave me in a state of indeci- 
sion which I have seldom experienced. I entertain the hope, however, 
that by February I shall have decided what is to be done. 

By the time this letter reaches you, the Congress will be about to 
convene. The Pasto incident has delayed the departure of the depu- 
ties from the south, and I doubt that many will go by way of the 
Dagua River, as it offers great and fearful hazards for the inhabitants 
of this country. I had somehow set my mind on their going that way, 
but I have not insisted lest the Congress be avoided because of the 
very dangers involved in reaching it. You know what difficulties we 
encountered in getting to Cucuta; hence, you can imagine what these 
gentlemen are up against in crossing the sea or enemy territories 
which are torrid, remote, and unhealthy. The general character of Co- 
lombia, although smaller in size than the United States, presents enor- 
mous problems, as the people here have no love of country. They are 
poor and, what is worse, uneducated. They therefore feel that they 
can do no good in Congress and that their presence in that assembly 
is not mandatory. We maintain separate legislatures and we segregate 
the people, their interests, and their military resources, while we 
unite only the armies so that brother can fight brother. I believe that 
our present dilemma is best stated as follows: Will it be easier for 
us to solve the difficulties of assembling the national representatives 
of a large state or will it be easier to meet the demands of a war, 
which is certain to break out in that state? Last night I was reading 
Rousseau on the subject of the little Republic of Geneva. He states 
that the massiveness of a large state is preserved and that it progresses 
of its own momentum, whereas the slightest defect in a small state 
results in its collapse. At that instant, I quickly surveyed the history 
of the world. I found that, while great empires have remained in- 
destructible despite numerous wars and violent upheavals, small 
nations have been wiped out by either a conqueror, a corrupt citizen, 
or an earthquake, like Caracas. I believe that the primary substance 
of all things is existence; the rest is secondary. Let us then see to it 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


307 


that we exist, for all our shortcomings and difficulties, since in the 
end it is always better to be than not to be. When I look at America 
I see her surrounded by the sea power of Europe, that is to say, en- 
circled by the floating fortresses of foreigners who are therefore 
enemies. I then find that a very rich and powerful nation, extremely 
warlike and capable of anything is at the head of this continent . 1 
This nation is unfriendly to Europe, and it is also opposed to the 
powerful English who desire to lay down the law to us and who, 
moreover, ultimately will. Further, I perceive the vast and powerful 
Mexican empire which, with its wealth and homogeneous blood, is 
in a highly favorable position to attack Colombia. I then cast my 
eyes over the endless coastline of Colombia, threatened by the fleets 
of every nation, by the Europeans whose colonies surround us, and 
by the Africans of Haiti whose strength is mightier than primeval 
fire. Before us stand the rich and beautiful Spanish islands, which 
will never be more than enemies. Behind us is ambitious Portugal 
with its immense colony of Brazil. To the south is Peru with her 
many millions in gold, nourishing her rivalry with Colombia and her 
ties with Chile and Buenos Aires. At the first sign of disagreement, 
the Peruvian navy, which because of her extensive coastline must be 
her strongest weapon, will have a major advantage in attacking our 
shores. Colombia will never be able to compete with Peru in naval 
strength on the Pacific as her own first concern is the Atlantic, 
whereas Peru has only one ocean with which to contend. As this pic- 
ture is undoubtedly true, tell me, what defense have we against so 
many adversaries? We are weaker than our southern brothers, the 
Mexicans, the [North] Americans, the English, and, finally, we are 
weaker than all those Europeans who are our neighbors in the West 
Indies. We occupy the center of the universe and border upon every 
nation. Who else can claim as much? We possess two and a half mil- 
lion inhabitants scattered over a wide desert. One part is savage, an- 
other slave, and most are enemies each of the other; all have been 
corrupted by superstition and despotism. What a wonderful contrast 
to hold up to all the nations of the earth! Such is our situation; such 
is Colombia; and then some want to divide her into fractions! 

Oh, my friend, how much thought I have given to this sickly child 
of ours. I wish that some capable man would take the trouble of pre- 
senting this picture to the public in all it sombre colors. 

I have this moment received the post from Peru. General Castillo 


1 United States of America (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


308 

gives me a detailed account of the movements of the enemy toward 
the coast, to meet the Alvarado and Lima divisions. He emphasizes 
Penis urgent need of fresh troops from Colombia, as he believes the 
Alvarado division will be destroyed sooner or later, while the Lima 
division cannot move, though there are those who want it to. Castillo 
tells me I should not leave the south, because of the reasons and fears 
that he has so often pressed upon me. 

General La Mar writes me two wonderful letters full of fancy 
phrases, but he does not comment upon my views respecting the de- 
fense of Lima. I had previously written him at length saying that 
he should not engage our division without strong assurance of success. 
He replies that all is well; that the enemy is discomfited; and that 
much has been achieved in that not all has been lost, despite the 
state of affairs resulting from San Martin’s departure. Castillo is very 
much afraid, and, in truth, with good reason. La Mar expresses con- 
fidence in order to be in accord with the Peruvian government, which 
has not been anxious for the Colombian reinforcements, as it lacks 
the means of transporting or maintaining them. According to Cas- 
tillo, they would accept these troops if we were to send them, thereby 
relieving Peru of their transport, for they have absolutely no facili- 
ties, as the country has been laid waste. The problem of Peru, as De 
Pradt said of the Negroes of Haiti, is so involved and so terrifying 
that no matter how it is viewed it presents nothing but horror, mis- 
fortune, and despair, whether the country be in the hands of the 
Spaniards or the Peruvians. 

From Alvarado nothing has yet been heard. It is probable that he 
will go to the provinces of Buenos Aires. Chile has sent 400 recruits 
as reinforcements to Lima. San Martin is taking the baths in Chile 
and appears to be put out with all things both past and present. In 
Lima now there is not much talk against us. They have asked me to 
rush them three or four thousand muskets, as though we had any to 
spare, whereas not one has reached us from the Isthmus despite our 
innumerable requests. 

I am your devoted and affectionate friend, 


BOLIVAR 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


309 


135. On the Education of Fernando Bolivar 1 
[ Original ] 

[1822] 

The education of children should always be in keeping with their 
age, inclinations, ability, and temperament. 

As my nephew is now past twelve years of age, he should be in- 
troduced to modern languages, without neglecting his own. The dead 
languages should be studied only after one has learned the living. 

Geography and cosmography are among the first subjects a young 
man should learn. 

History, like languages, should begin with a study of the present 
day, going back by degrees to the remote ages of the fable. 

It is never too early to make the acquaintance of the exact sciences, 
for they teach us how to analyze all things; passing from the known 
to the unknown, they thus train us to think and to reason logically. 

Further, the pupils aptitude for ciphering must be kept in mind, 
for not all are equally apt in mathematics. 

In general, all may learn geometry and understand it; but the same 
is not true of algebra or of differential and integral calculus. 

Too sharp a memory, though always a brilliant faculty, works to 
the detriment of understanding; so that the child who shows an ex- 
treme facility in memorizing his lessons should be taught those sub- 
jects that will oblige him to think, such as the solving of problems 
and the formulating of equations. Conversely, those who are deficient 
in retention should be taught to memorize and recite selected passages 
from the great poets. Memory, no less than skill in numbers, can be 
improved with practice. 

The memory should be exercised as much as possible, but never 
fatigued to the point of undermining it. 

Statistics is a necessary subject in our day, and I should like my 
nephew to learn it. 

He should preferably be instructed in the art and science of civil 
engineering, but not against his will, should he show no inclination 
for these studies. 

It is not essential that he learn music except if he should have a 


ir rhis nephew of the Liberator received part of his education at the Uni- 
versity of Virginia. Bolivar approved the boy's decision to attend the “Universi- 
dad de Jefferson," and urged him to pursue the course of study outlined in this 
document ( Cartas , VI, 166 ) (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


310 

passion for that art; however, he should master at least the rudiments 
of draftsmanship, astronomy, chemistry, and botany, delving more or 
less deeply into these sciences according to his inclination or liking 
for any one of them. 

Instruction in good breeding and social behavior is as essential as 
formal teaching; for this reason special care should be taken that he 
learn the code and manners of a gentleman from Lord Chesterfields 
letters to his son. 

Morality in the form of religious maxims and of practices condu- 
cive to the preservation of health and life is a subject no master can 
neglect. 

He should study Roman law, as it is universally the basis of legis- 
lation. 

Since it is very difficult to determine where art ends and science be- 
gins, if he is inclined to learn some skill or trade, I should welcome 
it, for doctors and lawyers abound among us, but we lack good me- 
chanics and husbandmen upon whom the country must depend to 
advance its prosperity and well-being. 

Should he find pleasure in it, let him indulge in dancing, which 
is the poetry of motion and which lends grace and suppleness to the 
person and is at the same time a wholesome exercise in temperate 
climates. 

Above all, I recommend that you instill in him the love of culti- 
vated society, where the fair sex exerts its benign influence. And teach 
him respect for age and for the attainments and the social position 
of his elders, for this renders youth charming and links it to hopes for 
the future. 


BOtiVAR 


THE CONFERENCE AT GUAYAQUIL 


THE QUESTION OF GUAYAQUIL 


The upheavals in Perii, caused by the abdication of the Protector 
San Martin and by the ineptitude of those who succeeded him in the 
government, engendered resentments, serious prejudices, and fictions 
respecting the reasons for his resignation from office. The united 
army organized by San Martin, which was large enough to decide 
the miltary campaign, was defeated in two battles early in 1823 . A 
strong Peruvian army recruited immediately thereafter melted away 
during ill-advised advances and retreats. The governments of La 
Mar, Riva Agiiero, and Torre Tagle crumbled, and the regiment of 
the Rio de la Plata surrendered El Callao to the Spaniards. 

Bolivar and his troops rushed to save Peru. On his arrival he was 
named General in Chief of the army; but the Peruvians, wishing to 
control their own government, gave him no position of authority in 
the civil administration. He was thus unable to attend to the supplies 
and other needs of the troops. With such necessities lacking, catas- 
trophe was a foregone conclusion. After being named Dictator follow- 
ing the complete collapse of the Peruvian government, he devoted 
himself to the reorganization of his Colombian army and to the for- 
mation of a Peruvian division, and, although he commanded inferior 
forces, in less than a year he triumphed over the Spanish armies of 
Peru and Upper Perii. As a result of these events, those who had par- 
ticipated in the preceding governments lost their posts and subse- 
quently worked against Bolivar. The friends of San Martin pondered 
the questions: why did he relinquish power, why did he abandon 
them when before him lay a brilliant future both for him and for 
themselves? These questions have been the source of many fables. 

If San Martin's resignation is considered from stricdy the moral 
point of view, it cannot be justified; hence attempts have been made 
to explain his action on material grounds. After numerous versions 
there gradually developed the legend that General San Martin had 
resigned because Bolivar had not desired to assist him with his troops 
despite San Martin s offer to serve under his orders; whereas in re- 
ality General San Martin withdrew for personal reasons, confident 
that his aids and the leading Peruvians who were in power were capa- 
ble of concluding his work with the resources he had collected. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


313 

The triumph of Bolivar brought further criticism of General San 
Martin by his former friends. As he could not confess to the true 
purpose of his visit to Guayaquil, namely, to bring about the absorp- 
tion of that province by Peru in order to satisfy the aspirations of the 
Peruvians, he allowed the legend to spread, as being the simplest 
answer to their questions. Had he succeeded in acquiring Guayaquil, 
his explanation would have been different. 

Much later, this fiction was crystallized in the form of an apocry- 
phal letter, dated August 29, 1822, allegedly addressed by San Mar- 
tin to Bolivar. This letter was the invention of a French adventurer, 
Gabriel Lafond de Lurcy, a former Peruvian naval officer, and was 
first published in his book of travels in 1843. 1 This work relates the 
legend of Bolivars refusal to save Peru. In refutation of this spurious 
tale there exist many documents that were written by Bolivar and by 
San Martin himself. Among these documents, there are the three 
reports dictated by Bolivar on July 29, 1822, respecting the confer- 
ence with San Martin and his official letter to the governments of 
Peru, Chile, and Buenos Aires of September 9, 1822. In the latter, 
Bolivar offered Peru all of Colombia's forces, beginning immediately 
with the four thousand men for which Colombia had obligated her- 
self in the treaty of July 6, 1822. But soon after the Protectors re- 
tirement, this aid was refused by the Peruvian government, which 
stated that it was not needed. 

The Spaniards, during the preceding months, however, had main- 
tained the defensive, and Peru, when led by the Protector, had pos- 
sessed 11,000 regulars and 20,000 militia, in admirably organized 
units. These forces were adequate to defeat the Spaniards and end 
the war for independence. General San Martin expressed this opinion 
in his message to the Congress on September 20, 1822, from which 
the following is taken: "I have complied with the promise that I 
made to Peru; I have seen her representatives assembled. The enemy 
force no longer threatens the independence of a people that craves 
freedom and possesses the means with which to obtain it. The army 
is prepared to march within a few days in order to end the war 
forever/' 2 He also expressed these thoughts in a personal letter to 
his brother-in-arms, General O'Higgins, Director of Chile, to whom 
he wrote: “The army has been reinforced with four battalions and 

1 Voyages dans VAmerique espagnole pendant les guerres de Vindependance. 

2 vols. (Paris, 1843), II, 138. 

2 Quoted in Bartolome Mitre, Historia de San Martin y de la emancipacion 
sud-americana. 4 vols. (Buenos Aires, 1890), III, 666. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


314 

three squadrons, three of the battalions being Colombian. The en- 
tire army now comprises over 11,000 regulars. The expedition to 
Intermedios under Alvarado will leave between September 11 and 
15, with 4,300 picked men. Arenales will make a frontal feint on 
the forces in the sierra, so that Alvarado will not be attacked by all 
the troops that the enemy can muster. The Lanza division, with 
900 fully armed men, will cooperate with this general movement. 
Failure is impossible.” 1 

In another letter to O’Higgins, dated a few days earlier, San Mar- 
tin stated: “You will censure me for not completing the work I have 
begun. You are entirely correct, but I am still more so. I am weary 
of being called tyrant, and of being accused of wanting to be king, 
emperor, and even Satan. Moreover, my health is seriously impaired 
and the climate of this country is likely to be my death. In brief, I 
sacrificed my youth in the service of the Spaniards and my middle 
years in the service of my country. I believe that I have the right to 
dispose of my old age.” 2 In a letter to his close friend Luzuriaga, then 
in Buenos Aires, he expressed himself more fully: “The 20th of this 
month [September] I shall convoke the General Congress, and on 
the 21st I shall embark for Chile. I shall remain there until the Cor- 
dillera is passable, then I shall go on to Buenos Aires to see my family 
and to arrange a plan for my remaining days. This country is securely 
established and for its safety I am leaving, in the capital alone, 1 1,000 
seasoned veterans in the best of condition. Rudecindo [Alvarado] 
will leave shortly for Intermedios, with a body of 4,500 picked 
troops, while Arenales will dislodge the enemy from the sierra. If, as 
I anticipate, these operations are carried out wisely and vigorously, 
there will be no enemy left in all Peru by the end of this year. What 
is more, Enrique Martinez is President of Trujillo. He has two bat- 
talions of infantry, another of artillery, and two squadrons of cavalry, 
ready for action where needed. You will tell me that, as all this is 
nearing its end, you do not approve of my leaving; but, my dear com- 
rade, you know the condition of my health, and above all how little 
I can bear to hear it said that I desire to be crowned and to be the 
despot. . . . Let them all have their way, and perhaps they will 
stop saying that I am ambitious if I withdraw to some secluded nook 
where I can live ignored by all the world.” 3 

1 Documentos del Archivo de San Martin. 11 vols. (Buenos Aires, 1910), V, 
516. 

2 August 20, 1822, Mitre, op. cit.. Ill, 658. 

*Documentos del Archivo de San Martin , X, 351-352. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


315 

In these documents San Martin told the Congress, his ally the 
government of Chile, and his close friend Luzuriaga what he had 
told Bolivar at their meeting in Guayaquil : namely, that his army was 
adequate for accomplishing the independence of Peru. In this he was 
perfecdy correct because, in 1824, after the Spaniards had considera- 
bly increased their forces, Bolivar was able to administer the final 
blow and to free Peru with only 9,000 men. 

There are many other facts and inferences which prove the 
Lafond letter to be spurious. We shall cite only two well-established 
facts. In 1822, the Spaniards did not have 19,000 men in their serv- 
ice in Peru, as that letter states. Their forces in Upper and Lower Peril 
numbered scarcely 1 1,000, as the charts and other documents published 
by the historian Paz Solddn prove. 1 The figure of 19,000 was reached 
by 1824, after the Spanish victories of 1823 and their recovery of 
Callao. Furthermore, San Martin could not have told Bolivar, as the 
Lafond letter makes it appear, that replacements had not been sup- 
plied the division of Santa Cruz, for not only had they been pro- 
vided him in Quito, but again in Cuenca he was given replacements 
equal in number to the losses suffered in his recent marches, with an 
additional 400 soldiers, proffered by Sucre and gladly supplied by 
Bolivar. Thus, in Quito, he received 600 regulars from among the 
prisoners in Pichincha, and in Cuenca another 500 from a battalion 
which Colonel Heres had recendy formed there from local recruits 
and veteran officers from various places. 2 Bolivar was anxious to 
please the Peruvians; and Sucre, inspired with similar thoughts a 
month before, had, on June 22, 1822, written General Tomds Guido, 
Penis Minister of War, in these terms: 'The division of Santa Cruz 
is preparing to return, and it will set out next week. All its casualties 
have been replaced with trained soldiers, men of Colombia, and it 
will be strengthened by recruiting that is being done in Cuenca/' 3 It 
is impossible, in the face of such clear and patent evidence, to sup- 
pose that General San Martin could have written Bolivar that Gen- 
eral Santa Cruz had not been supplied with replacements. 

But this is not all. The letter in question contains the following 


1 Mariano Felipe Paz Sold4n, Historia del Peru Independiente. ... 2 vols. 
(Lima, 1870-74), II, 328 and 435. 

* To Santander, Guayaquil, July 22, Vicente Lecuna, ed., Cartas del Liberta- 
dor. 11 vols. (Caracas, 1929-30; New York, 1948), III, 53. 

8 Recapilacidn de Documentos Oficiales (Guayaquil: Imprenta de la Naci6n, 
1894), p. 261. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


316 

remark: 'The division of General Santa Cruz (whose losses, this Gen- 
eral writes me, have not been replaced, despite his appeals) is bound 
to suffer heavy casualties in its long overland marches and therefore 
will be unable to take part in the present campaign.” 1 These opinions 
were expressed in Lafonds apocryphal letter of August 29, yet the 
Santa Cruz division had moved south from Guayaquil a month be- 
fore, on July 27 or 28, and by the date given in the Lafond letter it 
was already in Lima. 

After the discovery, in Quito in 1939, of the report to General 
Sucre dictated by Bolivar on the San Martin conference, Colombres 
Marmol, former Argentine ambassador to Peru, in 1941 published a 
book entided San Martin y Bolivar en la Entrevista de Guayaquil, 
based on certain apocryphal letters of Bolivar, Sucre, and San Martin. 
The purpose of this book was to keep alive the Lafond legend which 
had been exploded by the publication of the reports on the conference, 
interest in which was revived by these Quito discoveries. The publica- 
tion of the Colombres M&rmol volume caused a scandal. The Acade- 
mies of History of Colombia and Venezuela, the Bolivarian Societies 
of Ecuador and Panamd, and many Spanish-American and even 
Spanish historians declared that the documents were not genuine. 
The Academy of History of Buenos Aires, having reexamined the 
entire matter, reached the following conclusion: "The documents of- 
fered by Colombres Marmol are devoid of the essential attributes 
necessary to establish their unquestionable authenticity.” In other 
words, the Academy declared them to be spurious. 2 As a result of this 
pronouncement the President of the Argentine Republic, on Septem- 
ber 17, 1943, through the Department of Public Instruction, issued 
a decree refusing to accept these documents as a gift to the Argentine 
nation, which Colombres Mdrmol had offered after that government 
had refused to purchase them. 

In order to throw light on these problems of the Guayaquil meet- 
ing, a point of unquestionable importance in the history of the 
reciprocal relations of the Spanish-American republics, there are 
reproduced below documents relating to the status of the province of 
Guayaquil, the representations of the government of Peru respect- 

1 Lafond, op. cit., II, 139. 

2 Academia Nacional de la Historia de Buenos Aires, Resoluciones sobre 
documentos de la guerra de la lndependencia, relacionados con San Martin, 
Bolivar y Sucre. With a foreword by Ricardo Levene. (Buenos Aires, June, 
1945). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


317 

ing the province, and what took place in the interview between Boli- 
var and San Martin, which all too often has been pictured in a light 
wholly untrue to the historical facts. 1 


136. Royal Order Respecting the Dependency of Guayaquil 
[Copy ] 2 

Royal Palace, Madrid, July 7, 1803. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

Among other things respecting the defense of the city and the port 
of Guayaquil on which the Commission on Fortifications in America 
petitioned His Majesty, it proposed, in order that this city may enjoy 
the desired degree of safety and with greater saving to the Royal 
Treasury, that the government of Guayaquil should be dependent 
upon the jurisdiction of the Viceroy of Lima and not of Santa F6, 
as the latter cannot, when necessity arises, render it the requisite aid. 
The government of Lima, because of the greater facility and prompt- 
ness with which it can act, can provide assistance in the form of troops, 
money, military stores, and other supplies the said territory may lack. 
Lima is therefore in a better position and under greater motivation 
than Santa F6 to see to the wise administration of the moneys re- 
ceived and the expenses incurred. To this must be added the fact 
that, when circumstances require, the Viceroy of Lima can at the 
proper time, in order to insure the defense of Peru, in particular its 
capital, avail himself of the timber and other products of Guayaquil; 
this the Viceroy of Sante Fe cannot do. His Majesty having assented 
to the opinion of the said commission, I so advise Your Excellency by 
this Royal Ordinance, for your information, and for the ministry 


1 Vicente Lecuna, Cartas Apocrifas sobre la Conferencia de Guayaquil 
(Caracas, 1945). The resolutions of the Argentine government are found in 
ibid., p. 177 et sec. 

8 The original document is in the Archives of the Ministry of Foreign Rela- 
tions, Republic of Ecuador (ed.). 


31 8 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

under your charge to issue the necessary instructions for its observ- 
ance. 

God keep Your Excellency many years. 

Given at the Palace, July 7, 1803. 

Joseph Ant? Caballero 

MIGUEL CAYETANO SOLER 


137. Royal Decree Respecting the Dependency of Guayaquil 
[Copy] 1 

Madrid, June 24, 1819. 

I, the King, Governor of the City and Province of Guayaquil, 
have this day issued to my Viceroy of Peru a Royal Decree conceived 
as follows: I, the King, Viceroy, Governor, and Captain General of 
the provinces of Peru, and President of my Real Audiencia of Lima, 
in deference to my august father, rest his soul, and pursuant to the 
recommendations made by the Commission on Fortifications of Amer- 
ica respecting the defense of the city and port of Guayaquil, resolved, 
by my Royal Order, communicated to my Council of the Indies, on 
the seventh of July in the year eighteen hundred and three, that the 
government of Guayaquil should be dependent upon this viceroyalty 
and not upon that of Santa ¥6, for the reasons stated in connection 
with the charges submitted to your superior government by Jacinto 
Bejarano, resident of Guayaquil, against Bartolom6 Cucalbn, former 
Governor of that port and province. Various orders were issued and 
complaint was filed by Baron de Carondelet, former President of 
Quito, to the effect that your superior government should not have, 
with the exception of military matters, jurisdiction over Guayaquil 
in its political administration, its royal treasury, or its commerce, and 
ruling to such effect was requested. Whereas the said complaint was 
remitted with the Royal Order of the first of June, eighteen hundred 
and seven, to the above-mentioned council under my charge, together 
with a statement by the aforesaid Bejarano on this matter, a consulta- 
tive opinion was rendered on November the ninth following. And 
whereas my august father and Lord accepted same, and whereas it 
was his pleasure to disapprove the actions of the Viceroy who then 
governed those provinces, in admitting the above-mentioned charges 
in contravention of the aforementioned Royal Ordinance of the sev- 


1 Archives of the Ministry of Foreign Relations, Republic of Ecuador (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


319 

enth of July, eighteen hundred and three, which granted jurisdiction 
and superiority only in matters respecting the defense of the city and 
port of Guayaquil, he did approve the actions of the President 
and audiencia of Quito, in sustaining the Bejarano complaint against 
Governor Cucaldn on the strength of the law; but this royal decision 
could not be immediately communicated because of the entry of the 
French into Madrid. And whereas the city of Guayaquil, in a state- 
ment dated the twenty-eighth of October, eighteen hundred and 
fifteen, stated that its inhabitants and those of its provinces had been 
suffering since the year eighteen hundred and ten the severest of 
vexations on account of their complete subordination to your vice- 
royalty which was decreed by your predecessor, the Marquis de la 
Concordia, the city was thereby removed from jurisdiction of the 
audiencia of Quito, which, being the closer, should have had jurisdic- 
tion in points of dispute. Since that time these deserving inhabitants 
have lived unprotected by the courts, for very few among them are 
able to have recourse to your audiencia and to your superior govern- 
ment, however great their wrongs, as they are discouraged therefrom 
by the distance of over three hundred leagues; which causes the regu- 
lar mails to take a whole month to go there and another month to re- 
turn, if not delayed by the frequent overflowing of the rivers; and to 
send a special messenger costs at least three hundred 'pesos . The trans- 
action of business proceeds very slowly because of the many cases 
crowding the audiencia from all parts of the kingdom with the result 
that decisions are not made with the promptness due matters of this 
kind; while most regrettable of all is the fact that prisoners deserving 
of the utmost commiseration fill the jails and prisons without any re- 
lief and apparently are left to languish in their dungeons for life. 
And whereas, after calling attention to the very notable difference 
in court expenses as between your city and the city of Quito, eighty 
leagues distant from Guayaquil, the city officials have requested me 
to deign to have the said province annexed to the presidency of Quito, 
as it was before, at least in matters juridical, in which petition my 
real audiencia of Quito concurs. In view of the foregoing, my Council 
of the Indies in plenary session of all three chambers, having com- 
mended to me the statements of Toribio Montes and Juan Ramirez, 
presidents of Quito, and having examined the report of the general 
exchequer and the recommendations of my advisers, submitted to me 
in its consultative opinion of May seventeenth last; and my royal 
opinion having been formed by the reasons supporting the resolution, 
I have deemed it worthy of my approval. Wherefore, I do hereby 


32 ° 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


declare that, as the viceroyalty of Santa F6 has now been reestab- 
lished and the President of Quito and his audiencia are now exercis- 
ing their duties, it devolves upon the latter to attend all causes, 
whether they be civil or criminal, in the province of Guayaquil, as 
well as all matters pertaining unto my royal treasury; the said prov- 
ince, however, shall remain subject to your viceroyalty in matters 
military. And in order that this, my royal decision, may be promptly 
complied with, I have resolved to inform you, which I hereby do in 
this my Royal Decree, to arrange for the immediate restoration of the 
city and district of Guayaquil to the status that prevailed prior to 
the time that your predecessor, the Marquis de la Concordia, in 1810, 
resolved to annex it to your viceroyalty. And, further, you and my 
real audiencia shall accommodate your procedures to the provisions 
of the law in this regard, neither to hear nor take any cognizance 
whatsoever, in civil or criminal cases, or in matters of the royal 
treasury in and for the said city and province of Guayaquil, inasmuch 
as these matters pertain exclusively to the audiencia of Quito, as 
coming within its area and jurisdiction, it being understood that the 
least violation, delay, or procrastination in this matter shall incur my 
royal displeasure. The general accounting office of my aforementioned 
Council is, moreover, instructed to take due note of this decree. 

This order is communicated to you for your information and for the 
gratification of my beloved subjects, the inhabitants of the district 
within that government, and for due and proper performance as 
regards that portion of my said royal resolution which affects your 
good self, to which end I do likewise communicate this resolution as 
of this same date to my viceroyalty in Santa Fe, to the President of 
Quito, and to the reales audiencias in Lima and Quito. 

Given in Madrid, this 24th day of June, 1819. 

I, the King 

By order of the King, our Liege Lord, Silvestre Collar. 

Three rubrics. Guayaquil, April 6, 1820. 

This Royal Decree has been received, to be duly and respectfully 
obeyed. Let it be filed, attended, and executed in all its parts, and 
published by proclamation so that it may come to the notice of all 
persons. 

Juan Manuel Mendiburu.— Jos£ Luzcando.— Santiago Carrasco. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


3« 


138. To [Jos£ Joaquin de Olmedo], President of the 
Governing Junta of Guayaquil 

[Letterbook] 

General Headquarters of Caly, January 2, 1822. The 12th [year]. 
Most Excellent Sir: 

I am immensely happy on approaching the shores of the Pacific. I 
trust that my coming south will be marked by victory and peace. 
The south shall never again experience enemy fire. 

At this moment, General Torres' division is marching on that 
capital [Guayaquil] with 2,000 men. The Guard will follow the same 
route with me next month. 

I choose to believe, Most Excellent Sir, that the Republic of 
Colombia will have been proclaimed in your capital city prior to my 
entry. Your Excellency must know that Guayaquil is an integral 
part of the territory of Colombia: that a province has no right to with- 
draw from a confederation of which it is a part, and that it would 
violate the laws of Nature and of politics for any buffer state to be- 
come a battlefield for two strong states; furthermore, I believe that 
Colombia will never permit any American power to hold dominion 
over her territory. 

The arrival of our army in your city demands new sacrifices. 
Your Excellency will be advised of these by General Sucre, to whom 
I have given full powers to solicit aid from the government over which 
you most worthily preside or to obtain same through whatever means 
he finds available. Your Excellency will undoubtedly be good enough 
to lend General Sucre every assistance so that the final victory of 
Colombia may be carved by the hand of Olmedo. 

I have the honor to be Your Excellency's most obedient servant 


322 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


139. To Jos£ Joaquin de Olmedo, President of the 
Governing Junta of Guayaquil 

[Archivo de Sucre: copy ] 

Caly, January 2, 1822. 

Most Esteemed Sir and friend: 

You cannot imagine the pleasure that I feel as I move nearer to 
your native land— more at the thought that I shall meet its eminent 
leader than for any other reason. Aside from the many excellent re- 
ports about you, which I hear on all sides, private as well as public 
statements reveal you to be noble, sincere, and generous. The letters 
that you have kindly addressed to me have always given me satisfac- 
tion. They bear the imprint of an acute understanding, and true 
genius marks them as coming from a pen as simple as it is lofty, and 
from a man possessing gentleness for character and sublimity for his 
crest. I am therefore gready distressed at having to trouble a friend 
whom I already love. I refer to the communications which I have 
addressed both to the government and to General Sucre. In them you 
will note that I demand immediate recognition of the Republic of 
Colombia, as the situation in Guayaquil is one of intolerable confu- 
sion. For me to enter the city during this state of affairs would consti- 
tute an offense to me and a mockery of Colombia's rights. 

You know, dear friend, that a city and a river do not make a 
nation. Such an absurdity would prove to be the signal for battle 
between the two powerful states that surround it. You know the 
sacrifices we have made to defend Guayaquil in the midst of all our 
difficulties. You know that Colombia has sent her troops to defend 
your city, whereas Peru has appealed to your city for aid. Quito 
cannot survive without the port of Guayaquil, nor can Cuenca or 
Loja. All of Guayaquil's contacts are with Colombia. Tumbez is the 
boundary of Peru, and Nature has therefore given Guayaquil to us. 
Let it not be said that an act of insurrection can change these rights. 
In times past many a city has done the same without asserting any 
extravagant claims. Maracaibo has set an example of how to act; she 
has not imitated Guayaquil. 

The broadest of rights permitted a people united either by confeder- 
ation or by natural boundaries is complete and free representation 
in the national assembly. Every other demand is contrary to social 
rights. Furthermore, politics and war have their rules which cannot 
be broken without disrupting the social order. For these and many 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


3^3 

other reasons I have decided not to enter Guayaquil until I have 
seen the Colombian flag waving on high. I am confident that you will 
employ all the influence of your station, understanding, and dig- 
nity so that this day will not be one of mourning for Colombia; on 
the contrary, Guayaquil should become for our country the bond of 
freedom in the south and the most sublime example of politics con- 
ducted in a spirit of wisdom and unprecedented moderation. 

General Sucre will communicate to you the orders which he has 
received to start preparations for the forthcoming campaign. This 
will be the final, the most glorious effort of the peoples of Colombia 
to secure the only good there is: peace, glory, and liberty. 

I am your most obedient servant. 

Bolivar 


140. General Jose de San Martin to the Liberator 
President of Colombia 

[Copy ] 1 

Lima, March 3, 1822. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

From copies of the communications sent to me by the government 
of the province of Guayaquil, I regret to observe the serious recom- 
mendation which Your Excellency has directed to it respecting that 
province being united to the territory of Colombia. I have always 
felt that in so delicate a matter the spontaneous desire of Guayaquil 
should be the principle determining the conduct of the bordering 
states, neither of which is entided to influence the deliberation of 
the people through force. I have held this belief so sacred that, from 
the first day that I sent my deputies to that government, I refrained 
from influencing it in any matter not essentially related to the prose- 
cution of the war on this continent. If Your Excellency will permit 
me to speak in terms worthy of the brilliance of your name and in 
keeping with my sentiments, I will take the liberty of saying that it is 

1 Taken from Recopilacidn de Documentos Oficiales de la Epoca Colonial , 
con un Apendice Relativo a la Independencia de Guayaquil . . . (Guayaquil, 
1894), p. 226 (comp.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


3 2 4 

not our object to employ the sword for any purpose other than to 
reaffirm the right that we have acquired in battle to be acclaimed the 
liberators of our country. We must permit Guayaquil to examine her 
future destiny and reflect upon her own interests, in order that she 
may, of her own accord, join the country best suited to her purpose, 
for she cannot remain isolated without injury to both sides. I cannot, 
nor do I desire to, abandon the hope that the day of our first meeting, 
our first exchange of greetings, will signify the settlement of all our 
existing difficulties; that it will be an assurance of the bond which 
unites our two countries, and that we shall find that there is no 
obstacle which cannot ultimately be removed. Meanwhile, I beg 
Your Excellency to be assured that the glory of Colombia and Peru 
constitutes but one identical object for me, and that, as soon as that 
campaign into which the enemy is about to throw all his united forces 
in one final attempt is over, I will hasten to meet Your Excellency 
and seal our glory, which in large measure now depends on no one 
but ourselves. 

May it please Your Excellency to accept my sentiments of esteem 
and high regard. I remain your respectful and obedient servant. 

Josfi de San Martin 


141. Bernardo Monteagudo, Minister of Foreign Affairs 
of Peru, to General Jos& de La Mar 

[Paz Soldan, Historia del Peru lnde'pendiente , I, 261] 

Lima, March 3, 1822. 

Dear Sir: 

From the communications of the Liberator of Colombia to the 
government of Guayaquil, copies of which were sent to His Ex- 
cellency the Protector, there can be no doubt as to his overt plan of 
hostility toward that country and of the obligation devolving upon the 
government of Peru toward the government of that Republic. It is 
surprising that, in these critical circumstances, the government of 
Guayaquil is passively awaiting the outcome of the Liberators opera- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


3 2 5 

tions. Nevertheless, I wish to advise you that if at any time the 
government of Guayaquil, in harmony with the majority of the in- 
habitants of that province, should earnestly request the protection of 
Peruvian arms with a view to preserving their independence from 
Colombia, you are to employ all the forces under your command to 
support the freely expressed will of the people. 1 But if, on the con- 
trary, the government and the majority of the inhabitants of Guaya- 
quil should express themselves as being in favor of Colombian rule, 
you will then proceed without delay to the department of Trujillo 
to take over the general command of the north coast, unite with 
the division of Colonel Santa Cruz in Piura, increase it as much as 
the resources of the territory will permit, and act in keeping with the 
security requirements of the department of Trujillo. As it is impos- 
sible to foresee all of the developments that may occur in that area, 
the government, having complete faith in your tact, zeal, and under- 
standing, leaves it to your best judgment to act accordingly. I have the 
honor of advising you of the above for your information, etc. 

Bernardo Monteagudo 


142. Bernardo Monteagudo, Minister of Foreign Affairs 
of Peru, to General Josfi de La Mar 

[Paz Sold&n, Historia del Peru lnde'pendiente, II, 389] 

Lima, March 3, 1822. 

Dear Sir: 

I am enclosing a copy of the note, 2 dated today, which was sent 
by His Excellency the Supreme Delegate to the government of 
Guayaquil by way of General Salazar; and, by order of the supreme 
command, I am informing Your Excellency that you are to reach an 
understanding with the Peruvian diplomatic agent in Guayaquil in 
order that, following the delivery of the communications directed to 

1 General La Mar commanded the Peruvian forces which had been dis- 
patched to Guayaquil to aid those of Colombia against the Spanish (ed.). 

*See Doc. 140 (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


326 

that government, your actions will conform to the declaration which 
is to be issued in consequence. You are to order the withdrawal, at 
all costs, of the division of Colonel Santa Cruz to whatever point you 
may deem advisable in order to insure effectively the absolute in- 
dependence of Guayaquil, if that city wishes to remain independent. 
Should the city prefer to accede to the Liberator, you are to fall back 
to the borders of the department of Trujillo. His Excellency the 
Supreme Delegate is prepared to make every sacrifice necessary 
should Guayaquil wish to comply with the oath that she has taken. 
If such is the case, you will give that government all the assistance 
that circumstances and your zeal may suggest. In the contrary case, 
however, you are to join the division of Piura, to permit that province 
to follow freely whichever course she chooses, so that the world can 
bear witness that the government of Peru has no interest other than 
that of seeing the popular will enforced everywhere, and that its 
policy tends solely toward this end. 

I have the honor, etc. 

Bernardo Monteagudo 


143. General Jos£ de San Martin to the President of the 
Governing Council of the Province of Guayaquil 

[Copy] 1 

Lima, March 14, 1822. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

The reports that this government has recently received from the 
government of Guayaquil respecting the negotiations concluded, 
under its auspices, with the commander of the Spanish naval forces, 
leave no doubt whatsoever about the sentiments with which your 
government is imbued. I can assure Your Excellency that Peru will 

1 This copy was taken from the El patriota de Guayaquil in 1822 and sent 
by Bolivar to the Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Colombia with his note of 
June 1, 1822, Doc. 144. The original is in the Archivo Nacional de Colombia. 
Archivo de la Republica: Historia, II, folio 248 (comp, and ed.). 



The Capture of the flecheras 



* 










SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


32,7 

never forget this service and that she will hold as dearly as her own 
the independence, dignity, and prosperity of Guayaquil. 

Please, Your Excellency, accept the thanks and gratitude of the 
people whom I have the honor of leading. 

God keep you many years. 

Jos£ de San Martin 


144. To [Pedro Gual], Minister of Foreign Affairs 
[OrigmaZ] 1 

Trapiche, June 1, 1822. 

Due to the departure of my secretary Colonel Perez on a mission 
to the government of Quito, I must write you myself to enclose a 
communication from the Protector of Peru, the contents of which are 
obviously important. I also enclose a notice from the Protector ad- 
dressed to the government of Guayaquil and published in the Gaceta 
del Patriota of that city. 2 

From these documents, you will note that the Protector of Peru 
undertakes: 1. To meddle in the internal affairs of Colombia as 
regards her relations with her provinces; 2. To assert that Guayaquil 
should not remain independent but must decide to join one state or 
the other; 3. To assure Guayaquil that Peru will cherish Guayaquil's 
independence as dearly as its own. 

The state of mind prevailing in Guayaquil is well known to you; 
and, indeed, I believe it is to every one. The contradictions which 
can be seen in the statements of the Protector are of such a nature 
as to make one wonder whether or not he is acting in good faith. 
In consequence of the foregoing and of much more that I cannot 
mention as I do not have the time for it, I have thought it my duty 
to consult the executive power respecting the line of conduct that 
I should follow in regard to Guayaquil and Peru, with reference to 
the immediate problem of Guayaquil's separation and Peru's interven- 

1 Archivo Nacional de Colombia. Archivo de la Republica: Historia, tomo 
II, folios 251 and 252 (comp.). 

“See Doc. 143 (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


328 

tion. It is my opinion that the executive power should seek advice 
not only from the Council of Ministers but, if possible, from every 
member of the Senate who is in the capital, and also from the High 
Court of Justice, if this should be deemed advisable. I am making 
this suggestion solely to make sure that the validity of the decision 
will be discussed with the largest possible number of responsible in- 
dividuals so that their counsel will add weight to the policy I must 
pursue in a matter as delicate as the one in question. 

I intend to be guided in this matter by no other rule than that com- 
municated to me by the executive power, which, without doubt, will 
be wise and just. However, I must make it clear that if, in the last 
analysis, we believe that we would be justified in using force in 
order to keep Peru within its boundaries and to oblige Guayaquil to 
return again to those of Colombia, then it is my opinion that we should 
employ such force as quickly as possible. It should be preceded only 
by the most indispensable negotiations, while at the same time 
exercising extreme tact in order to win over both those who favor 
Peru and those who desire Guayaquil's independence, while culti- 
vating the goodwill of those already friendly to Colombia. I wish 
to mention, however, that this is merely a suggestion and that, in 
reaching a decision, I ask only that it be taken into careful considera- 
tion for what it is worth. 

I anxiously await the decision of the executive power so as to 
accommodate my conduct to its final decision. Let me solemnly state 
that, until I have received a reply, I shall act as circumstances dictate, 
but I will not employ force, for this would amount to my taking the 
initiative in a matter which is, without question, of the gravest con- 
sequence. 

God keep you many years. 


BOLIVAR 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


3 2 9 


145. To General Jos£ de San Martin, Protector of Peru 
[Copy] 1 

Quito, June 22, 1822. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

I have the honor of replying to the note, dated March 3 of this 
year, which Your Excellency kindly sent me from Lima. 2 This note 
reached me only after many delays, caused by the difficulties of com- 
munication encountered in the region of Pasto. 

Your Excellency expresses the regret that you experienced on see- 
ing the recommendation that I made to the province of Guayaquil, 
urging it to take cognizance of its rights. I do not agree with Your 
Excellency that the desire of a province must be consulted in order 
to assert its national sovereignty. It is not the parts of a nation but 
the whole nation that deliberates in freely and lawfully convened 
general assemblies. The Constitution of Colombia grants Guayaquil 
most adequate representation; and all sections of Colombia, includ- 
ing Caracas, the birthplace of liberty, have held themselves suffi- 
ciendy honored by the full exercise of the sacred right of participating 
in the nation's councils. 

Your Excellency has acted in a manner worthy of your name and 
fame in refraining, as you have assured me, from interfering in the 
affairs of Guayaquil, except as concerned matters affecting the conti- 
nental war. Colombia has pursued a line of conduct similar to Your 
Excellency's. Colombia now, however, being unable to tolerate the 
spirit of factionalism which has retarded successful conclusion of the 
war and which threatens to spread disorder throughout the south of 
Colombia, has definitely resolved not to permit the unconstitutional 
existence of a junta, which is the scourge of the people of Guayaquil 
rather than an expression of their will. Perhaps Your Excellency has 
not received sufficiendy impartial accounts of the state of unrest 
afflicting that province, which a handful of ambitious men seek to 
govern. I shall give you one instance of this prevailing anarchy. When 
the dissidents could not secure a plurality of votes in certain elections 
they ordered the inmates of the presidio of Guayaquil to be freed, so 
that the names of these criminals, added to their roster, would give 
their party a majority of the votes. I believe the annals of the King- 

1 Taken from Recopilacion de Documetttos Oficiales de la Epoca Colonial , 
con un Apendice Relativo a la Independencia de Guayaquil . . . (Guayaquil, 
1894), p. 288 (comp.). 

* See Doc. 140 (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


r— 


330 


dom of Hell [Bajo lmperio] reveal no more scandalous piece of 
chicanery. 

Permit me to thank Your Excellency for your frank manner of 
speaking in the note to which I am replying. Beyond question, the 
sword of a liberator should be used only to protect the rights of a 
people. It gives me great satisfaction, Most Excellent Protector, to be 
able to assure you that mine has never been drawn except to safe- 
guard the integrity of Colombia's territory, to give her people the 
greatest measure of freedom, and at the same time to end both 
tyranny and anarchy. The liberating army under my orders has 
fought for these holy ends and has succeeded in freeing the country 
not only from the hands of the usurpers but also from the malcon- 
tents who have sought to spread confusion. 

Your Excellency has earned the gratitude of Colombia in express- 
ing disapproval of the independence of the province of Guayaquil, 
for this would be a political absurdity, and in these times of war a 
challenge to both Colombia and Peru. I do not believe that Guayaquil 
has the right to demand of Colombia consent to express her will as 
to whether or not she should be part of the Republic; nevertheless, 
I shall consult the people of Guayaquil because they are deserving of 
every consideration Colombia can give and in order that the world 
may see that in Colombia there are no sections unwilling to obey her 
judicious laws. 

But, laying all political matters aside, Your Excellency has told 
me, in a noble and generous manner befitting the leader of a great 
people, that our first personal meeting will set the stamp of harmony 
and unity upon the relations between our countries. Once this spirit 
prevails, there is no obstacle that cannot be removed. Such magna- 
nimity of heart on the part of the Protector of Perii has been my guid- 
ing hope. The interests of a small province must not interrupt the 
onward march of $11 South America. United in heart, in spirit, and 
in aims, this continent must overlook the petty quarrels of the revo- 
lution and raise its eyes instead to peer into the centuries which lie 
ahead. It can then contemplate with pride those future generations 
of men, happy and free, enjoying to the full the blessings that 
Heaven bestows upon this earth, and recalling with thanks in their 
hearts their protectors and liberators of our day. 

The meeting that Your Excellency was kind enough to suggest to 
me is one to which I look forward with the utmost eagerness, with 
the conviction that it will bring about results equal to the spirit that 
has prompted it. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 33 1 


Please accept the assurances of my highest regard, and believe me 


to be your obedient servant 


Bolivar 


146. Pedro Gual, Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
to the Liberator President 


[Original] 

Most Excellent Sir: 


Bogotd, June 25, 1822. 


As soon as I received Your Excellency’s communication, dated at the 
General Headquarters in Trapiche on June 1 last, 1 1 had the honor of 
submitting it to the executive power of the Republic for its informa- 
tion and action. The question of the possession of Guayaquil ap- 
peared to be of such grave importance that the Council of Govern- 
ment found it necessary to consider it from every possible angle. 

I must advise Your Excellency of the resolution of the Congress 
respecting this matter. That entire legislature deemed it a matter of 
concern and unanimously agreed that, as respects the incorporation 
of the provinces that compose the presidency of Quito, the path 
of friendly negotiation should be followed rather than force. 

The question assumes a substantially different aspect once the 
major part of the province has given its consent and only one section 
attempts to assume the r61e of outsider. The practice of other nations 
which boastfully profess adherence to principles as liberal as those 
held by Colombia definitely supports the view that those interests and 
those parties so interested that constitute but a small fraction of a 
society must yield to the majority. The natural laws of man cannot 
in any degree be applied to the social state, wherein many of the 
said laws are waived in order that man may enjoy the benefits re- 
sulting from the union of power and force. Nor can man in the natu- 
ral state exist in the midst of society without doing grave injury to 
the members that comprise it. This would be the case in Guayaquil 
if, situated as it is between Peru and Colombia, it should continue in 


1 See Doc. 144 (ed.). 


33 2 SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

a state of isolation disadvantageous to itself and prejudicial to the 
states of Colombia. 

The statement that I have the honor of submitting to Your Ex- 
cellency manifests clearly that the present government of Guayaquil 
was not unaware of these principles, since it was careful to apply 
them at the time of its political transformation. With what right, 
then, did it decree the accession of twenty thousand souls comprising 
the canton-province of Porto-Viejo, contrary to their freely expressed 
declaration favoring Colombia? That same right is the very one we 
can assert today in order to compel Guayaquil to abide by its obliga- 
tion if the desired result cannot be obtained by friendly negotiations. 
This right favors us all the more strongly as Peru cannot cite the 
slightest argument to justify her pretentions, nor any that would 
entitle her Protector to give Your Excellency unnecessary advice. 
The Republic of Colombia has given more than sufficient evidence 
of its spirit of moderation in its dealings with the other American 
states. It has respected their institutions, whatsoever their character, 
and it has refrained from interfering, either directly or indirectly, in 
their domestic affairs. This, it appears, would entitle us to like treat- 
ment, especially when it is recalled that our rights rest, beyond all 
doubt, upon covenants and upon the uti possidetis 1 at the time when 
the Republic was founded. If it is true, as it unquestionably is, that 
the bay of Tumbez marks the end of our territory on the Pacific coast, 
then the province of Guayaquil falls within our boundaries, and no 
foreign power can, with any semblance of reason, interfere in any 
manner in this dispute. 

What should be done in the present instance, therefore, is a matter 
exclusively for us to decide. We may adopt extreme measures if we 
so desire, without offending anyone. Whereas, however, a newly 
formed state should always proceed with the greatest circumspection, 
even as the government of a free people must temporize insofar as 
is consistent with its dignity in cases where its conduct might be 
condemned as oppressive or tyrannical, and whereas in determining 
the fate of a city which is forever to form a single family with us it 
becomes necessary to conciliate divergent views rather than to arouse 
them; thus, in the opinion of the executive power, it appears that 
the problem should not now be decided except insofar as successful 
use can be made of persuasion, favorable circumstances, and any 

1 The principle that the boundaries of the new republics would remain the 
same as in the colonial era (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


333 

fortunate turn of events that will enable the matter to be brought 
to a successful conclusion. Little would be needed to prove to the 
partisans of Peru in that province that their interests, properly under- 
stood, lie with Colombia. This Republic, having no effective outlets 
in the Pacific other than those of Panamd and Guayaquil, would 
regard these as her very own, and she would do everything to pro- 
mote their progress and to defend them with all her strength. How 
different the lot of these people would be should they one day come 
under the laws of a state which would treat them as a pitiful minority 
and which would so direct its trade and agriculture as to benefit and 
aggrandize its various other maritime provinces. The voice of a 
deputy from Guayaquil would have little influence in the Congress 
of Peru when compared with the strength of competing provinces, 
whereas in Colombia Guayaquil would always find the desired sup- 
port and complete protection. 

All this has induced His Excellency the Vice President and the 
Council of Government to believe that no one could resolve this ques- 
tion with so much skill as Your Excellency by virtue of the extra- 
ordinary powers which the law has vested in you. Nevertheless, it 
has been decided to lay before you, merely as suggestions, the follow- 
ing points: 

1. That, in the settlement of the Guayaquil question, friendly 
negotiation is to be preferred throughout, to be conducted with all 
the understanding that distinguishes Your Excellency. 

2. That, should such procedure fail to achieve results, the canton- 
province of Porto-Viejo and all the towns of the province of Guaya- 
quil which have recognized or are disposed of their own free will 
to recognize the Republic of Colombia should be occupied by force 
immediately. 

3. That, on the borders of that section of the territory of Guayaquil 
remaining separate from Colombia, customs houses, similar to those 
in our maritime ports, should be established at once, where the same 
import and export duties shall be levied on products and merchan- 
dise brought into or exported from our province into Guayaquil, and 
vice versa, as on other foreign trade in permissible non-contraband 
goods. 

4. That if, in consequence of the above measures, the government 
of Guayaquil should commit the slightest act of hostility or violence, 
the troops of Colombia should forthwith occupy the entire province, 
which from that moment shall be annexed to the Republic. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


334 

As these are only mere suggestions, the government leaves every- 
thing to the wisdom and experience of which Your Excellency has 
given such excellent evidence throughout your public life. 

God keep you, etc. 

PEDRO GOAL 


14 7. To General Jos£ de San MartIn, Protector of Peru 
[O’Leary, XIX, 338] 

Guayaquil, July 25, 1822. 

Most Excellent Sir: 

We have this moment been most pleasantly surprised to learn that 
Your Excellency has arrived off the shores of Guayaquil. My happi- 
ness, however, is clouded by the fact that we shall have time to pre- 
pare only a meagre part of the welcome that is due the Hero of the 
South, the Protector of Peru. Moreover, I do not know that the news 
is reliable, for I have received no communication deserving of cre- 
dence. 

I am taking the liberty of sending you my aide-de-camp, Colonel 
Torres, in order that he may have the honor of complimenting you 
on my behalf and of requesting Your Excellency kindly to send back 
one of my aides to advise me when you will honor us by your pres- 
ence in the city. 

I am extremely anxious to meet with you; such a meeting will 
gready redound to the benefit of South America, and will satisfy my 
most fervent desire to greet personally the father of Chile and Peru 
in token of sincere friendship. 

I have the honor, etc. 


Sim6n Bolivar 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


335 


148. To General Jos£ de San Martin, Protector of Peru 
[Larraz&bal, Vida de Bolivar , II, 152] 

Guayaquil, July 25, 1822. 

It is with extreme satisfaction, most Estimable Sir and friend, 
that I, for the first time, address you by this name which, in my 
heart, has long been reserved for you alone. I have called you friend, 
and this shall be the only name used between us through all the 
days of our life, for friendship is the only proper bond between com- 
rades in arms, in action, and in ideas. I congratulate myself, for you 
have honored me with an expression of your affection. 

Had you not come to this city, I should have regretted it as keenly 
as if I had been defeated in many battles. But no, you will not dis- 
appoint the eagerness that I experience to greet in person, on the 
soil of Colombia, the man closest to my heart and that of my coun- 
trymen. Is it possible that you have come so far only to refuse Guaya- 
quil the immense pleasure of welcoming one of such unique distinc- 
tion, whom all are anxious to meet and know? 

It is not possible, my honored friend. I expect you, and I will 
gladly meet you wherever you should be good enough to await me, 
yet I refuse to abandon the hope that you may honor us by a visit to 
this city. A few hours, as you have said, suffice for military men to 
come to an understanding; but a few hours will hardly be enough 
to gratify the demands of friendship, once it has experienced the 
pleasure of personal acquaintance with one hitherto cherished only 
through his name and high repute. 

Please let me repeat the assurance of my sincerest sentiments, and 
believe me to be your devoted and affectionate servant and friend. 

Bolivar 


33^ SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

149 . J[ose] G[abriel] Perez, Secretary-General, to Pedro 
Gual, Minister of Foreign Affairs 

[Original ] 1 

General Headquarters, Guayaquil, July 29, 1822. 

Confidential. 

Mr. Secretary: 

I have the honor of informing you that His Excellency the Pro- 
tector of Peru entered this city on the 26th of the present month, 
and of transmitting to you a summary of the principal and most 
noteworthy matters discussed in the meetings between Their Ex- 
cellencies, the Liberator and the Protector of Peru, during the latter s 
stay here. 

As soon as the Protector met the Liberator on board ship, he 
manifested his feelings for him by embracing him and voicing pro- 
testations of a most sincere and loyal friendship. He then congratu- 
lated the Liberator on his remarkable perseverance in the face of the 
adversities that he had experienced and on his sweeping victory in 
the cause which he espoused. He closed his remarks with eulogies and 
lavish praise. His Excellency replied in the gracious and noble 
manner that propriety and gratitude demand in such circumstances. 

The Protector at once opened the conferences in a frank, out- 
spoken manner. He suggested to His Excellency that only a few 
hours on land would be needed for them to understand one another 
fully. 

Shortly after reaching His Excellency's house, the Protector began 
to talk exclusively of what had already formed the subject of their 
conversations. He posed vague and unrelated questions regarding 
military and political matters, not going deeply into any one of them, 
but passing from one to another, mingling the serious and the trivial 
indiscriminately. If the character of the Protector is not as frivolous 
as he made it appear by his conversation, it must be supposed that his 
actions were deliberate. His Excellency is not inclined to believe that 
this behavior was an indication of the Protectors true character, yet 
neither does it appear to him that the Protectors speech and behavior 
were entirely forced. 

The most important subjects which the Protector brought up in his 
conferences with His Excellency during his stay in Guavaquil were 
the following: 


1 Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, Bogotd, Colombia (comp.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


337 

First: Having reached the house, the Protector, in asking His 
Excellency if he was not disgusted with the tangled affairs of 
Guayaquil, used a coarse and vulgar expression, a cutting term that 
presumably means trickery; moreover, to the great embarrassment of 
all present, he again used the same expression in referring to the 
length of time that our revolution has continued. 

Second: The Protector, of his own accord and unprompted, re- 
marked to His Excellency that he had nothing to say to him re- 
garding the affairs of Guayaquil as he had taken no part in them 
and that the blame lay with those people in Guayaquil, meaning his 
opponents. His Excellency replied that his desire to consult the 
wishes of that city had been fully realized, for on the 28th of the 
present month the electors would meet; that he was counting upon 
the will of the people and a plurality of the votes in the assembly. 
The Protector thereupon changed the subject and went on to talk 
of military matters relative to the expedition which is soon to depart. 

Third: The Protector complained about his command and, above 
all, about his comrades-in-arms who had recently abandoned him in 
Lima. He asserted that he was going to retire to Mendoza; that 
he had left a sealed note to be presented to the [Peruvian] Congress 
renouncing the Protectorate; that he would also refuse reelection, 
which he expected; that as soon as he had won the first victory, he 
would give up his military command rather than await the end of 
the war. But he added that, before he retired, he would lay the firm 
foundations of government; that this government should not be 
democratic, as that form of government was not suitable for Peru; 
and lastly, that an independent, unattached prince should be brought 
over from Europe to rule that state. His Excellency replied that to 
invite any prince would please neither America nor Colombia, as 
princes were wholly extraneous to our peoples; that he would oppose 
such a thing if he were able; but that he would not oppose any form 
of government that a state, of its own accord, might choose to estab- 
lish. Respecting this particular, His Excellency then expounded all 
his views on the nature of government, referring to all that he had 
said in his speech to the Congress of Angostura. The Protector re- 
plied that the securing of a prince was a matter for the future. His 
Excellency rejoined that it would never do to import princes; that 
he would prefer to see General Iturbide crowned than bring in the 
Bourbons, the Hapsburgs, or any other European dynasty. The Pro- 
tector then stated that in Peru there was a large party of lawyers who 
wanted a republic, and he complained bitterly about these men of 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


338 

law. It can be presumed that his plan is to erect a monarchy now, 
by offering the crown to several European princes, and finally to 
grant the throne to the one gaining the most popular support or 
having the strongest force to offer. If the Protector speaks in earnest, 
then no one is further than he from occupying such a throne. He 
appears to be sincerely convinced of the difficulties inherent in 
leadership. 

Fourth: The Protector told His Excellency that Guayaquil ap- 
peared to him to be the most suitable place for the capital of the 
federation, which he applauded highly as being the very foundation 
of our existence. He feels that the government of Chile will have no 
objections to joining it, but that Buenos Aires cannot join it because 
of the lack of unity in that country. Above all, nothing was closer 
to the Protector s heart than the permanent federation of Peru and 
Colombia, even though no other state should join, for he believes 
that, when the troops of one state are at the disposal of the other, 
the strength of each government will be increase! with respect to 
internal enemies, both ambitious and seditious. This one aspect of a 
federation appealed to the Protector most strongly and he was espe- 
cially anxious to see it put into practice. The Protector favored the 
exchange of recruits between the two states, in order to fill in any 
gaps in their armies, even though it might be necessary to make room 
for them by leaves of absence, promotions, or other devices. He was 
emphatic in pointing out the necessity for this, and perhaps it may 
be said that this was the proposition he most earnestly supported 
during the course of the conversations. 

Fifth: In their very first talk, the Protector, of his own accord, 
told His Excellency that the matter of boundaries would offer no 
problem whatsoever, and that he would undertake to sponsor it in 
the Congress, where he did not lack friends. His Excellency replied 
that he expected no less, principally because the treaty 1 so provided 
and also because the Protector himself was so well disposed toward an 
arrangement of such importance. His Excellency felt that he should 
not, at the moment, insist on a guarantee respecting the boundaries 
which had been so vigorously offered, but which the Peruvian gov- 
ernment had rejected under pretext of its being a legislative question 
that had to be presented to Congress. On the other hand, as the 
Protector did not possess the executive power, he had no authority to 
take part in the negotiation. Moreover, as the Protector had come 


1 A treaty of union, league, and confederation offered by Colombia for signa- 
ture in Peru, Mexico, Chile, and Buenos Aires (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


339 

merely as a visitor without any object, military or political, and since 
he did not speak officially even of the troops that Colombia had of- 
fered and that he knew were being made ready for departure, His 
Excellency would have acted unwisely if he had insisted upon such 
a guarantee; for, as the Protector was not at liberty to commit himself 
in any way, such insistence could only have offended, without afford- 
ing any compensating advantage. His Excellency thought that the 
matter of boundaries should be taken up formally through special 
negotiation which would permit reciprocal compromises, in order to 
establish the boundaries. 

Sixth: His Excellency reminded the Protector of his last commu- 
nication in which he had proposed that the deputies of Colombia, 
Peru, and Chile should be convened at a given point to treat with 
the Spanish envoys that are coming to Colombia for that purpose. 
The Protector highly approved of His Excellency's proposal and 
promised, on Peru's part, to send, as soon as possible, Rivadeneira, 
reputedly a friend of Elis Excellency the Liberator, with adequate 
instructions and powers. He even promised to use his good offices 
and all his influence with the government of Chile to have that state 
take similar action, offering further to do all this as quickly as pos- 
sible so that these emissaries might in proper time meet with ours 
in Bogotd. 

His Excellency spoke to the Protector respecting Mexican affairs, 
about which the Protector did not seem very well informed, nor did 
he express any judgment regarding the affairs of that country. Ap- 
parently he did not consider that Mexico was of any great moment 
or interest. 

He seemed to have great confidence in the Supreme Director of 
Chile, General O’Higgins, because of his tenacity of purpose and the 
affinity of their views. He stated that the government of the province 
of Buenos Aires was being consolidated with energy and order with- 
out any especial severity being shown her dissidents. He mentioned 
also that Buenos Aires was unconquerable, that its inhabitants were 
devoted republicans, that it would be difficult for any external force 
to influence them in any direction, and that order would be brought 
about through their own efforts. 

The Protector believes the enemy is weaker than he, and that the 
enemy's leaders, though daring and able, are not to be greatly feared. 
He will immediately begin his campaign with a maritime expedition 
to Intermedios and one from Lima, defending that capital by a 
frontal march on the enemy. 


34° SELECTfD WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 

The Protector told His Excellency that he might ask anything he 
wished of Peru, as his answer would never be anything but yes, yes, 
yes; and that he hoped Colombia would reciprocate. This offer of 
services and friendship is without qualification, and it displays a 
frankness and a sense of satisfaction that appear to be sincere. 

These, Mr. Secretary, are the major topics that were discussed in 
the interview between the Protector and His Excellency. I inform 
you of them for the governments guidance, having endeavored to 
couch them in approximately the very terms employed by Their 
Excellencies. 1 

God be with you. 

/. G. PEREZ 


150. J[os£] G[abriel] P£rez to General Antonio Jos£ Sucre, 
Intendant of the Department of Quito 

[Original ] 2 

General Headquarters, Guayaquil, July 29, 1822. The 12th [year]. 
My dear General: 

I have the honor of informing you that on the 26th, at nine o'clock 
in the morning, His Excellency the Protector of Peru entered this 
city. 

No sooner did the Protector see His Excellency the Liberator 
aboard the ship that had brought him than he expressed in the most 

1 Despite the implication that a third party was present, the meeting of the 
two men was private. P4rez received the above account from Bolivar. This let- 
ter and those written to Sucre (Doc. 150) and to Santander (Doc. 151), prove 
that San Martin's letter to Bolivar, dated August 29, 1822, which was first 
published by Lafond de Lurcy in 1843, is apocryphal. The three documents of 
July 29, 1822, establish the fact that San Martin, in this interview, did not ask 
Bolivar for troops as does that of September 9, 1822, addressed to the govern- 
ments of Pern and Chile (Doc. 153) (comp.). 

a Archivo y Museo Central de Quito (comp.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF $OLIVAR 


341 

cordial terms the sentiments that had heightened his desire to meet 
the Liberator, to embrace him, and to assure him of his true and last- 
ing friendship. He congratulated His Excellency on his remarkable 
perseverance amidst the adversities that he had met with in de- 
fense of the cause of freedom and on the victory which had crowned 
his heroic achievements. Altogether, the Protector protested his 
friendship for His Excellency in terms of high eulogy and lavish 
praise. 

His Excellency replied in the noble and gracious terms that pro- 
priety and gratitude demand in such circumstances. 

The Protector opened the conferences in a most frank manner. 
The principal topics were as follows: 

The situation recently experienced in this province, because of 
the ferment of political opinions, was discussed. Of his own accord 
the Protector told His Excellency that he had not interfered in the 
tangled affairs of Guayaquil, that he had not the slightest part in 
them, and that the fault was theirs, meaning the opposition. His Ex- 
cellency replied that his desire to consult that city had been realized, 
for on the 28 th the electors would meet, and that he was counting 
upon the will of the people and a plurality of votes in the assembly. 
The Protector thereupon changed the subject and went on to talk 
of military matters and of the expedition which is about to depart 
[for Peru]. 

The Protector complained a great deal about his command and, 
above all, about his comrades-in-arms who had recently abandoned 
him in Lima. He asserted that he was going to retire to Mendoza, 
that he had left a sealed note to be presented to the Congress, re- 
nouncing the Protectorate, that he would also refuse the election 
which he expected to win; and that, as soon as he had won the first 
victory, he would give up his military command and not await the 
war's end. But, he added, before retiring he would give thought to 
laying the foundations of the [Peruvian] government. He stated that 
this government should not be democratic, as democracy did not suit 
Peru; and lastly he said that an independent, unattached prince 
should be brought from Europe to rule Peru. His Excellency replied 
that to invite European princes would please neither America nor 
Colombia, as they were extraneous to our people, and that for his 
part His Excellency would oppose them if he were able, yet without 
interfering in whatever form of government any country might de- 
sire. His Excellency set forth all his ideas on the nature of govern- 
ments, repeating all that he had said in his speech to the Congress 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


34 2 

of Angostura. The Protector replied that the securing of a prince was 
a matter for the future. 

It can be assumed that his plan is to erect a monarchy by offering 
the crown to several European princes, and finally to grant the throne 
to the one receiving the most popular support or having the strongest 
force to offer. If the Protector is sincere in what he says, no one is 
further than he from occupying such a throne. He appears to be 
convinced of the difficulties inherent in leadership. 

The Protector applauded highly the federation of the American 
states as being the very foundation of our political existence. He 
regards Guayaquil as the most suitable place for the headquarters of 
such a federation. He believes Chile will have no objections to join- 
ing it, but that Buenos Aires, because of the lack of unity and method 
in that country, will refuse. He said that nothing was closer to his 
heart than to have the federation between Colombia and Peru con- 
tinue, even in the absence of other states. 

The Protector believes the enemy is weaker than he, and that 
the enemy's leaders, though daring and able, are not to be greatly 
feared. He will immediately open his campaign with a maritime 
expedition to Intermedios and from Lima, defending that capital by 
a frontal march on the enemy. 

In their very first talks, the Protector, of his own accord, told His 
Excellency that the matter of boundaries between Colombia and 
Peru would be setded satisfactorily and without the slightest dif- 
ficulty. He would undertake to sponsor it in the Congress, where he 
did not lack friends. 

The Protector told His Excellency that he might ask anything he 
wished of Peru, as his answer would never be anything but yes, yes, 
yes; and that he hoped that Colombia would reciprocate. This offer 
of services and friendship is without qualification, and it displays a 
frankness and a sense of satisfaction that appear to be sincere. The 
Protectors visit to Colombia was not official in character; it was 
merely a visit to His Excellency the Liberator for no ulterior pur- 
pose, political or military. He did not so much as refer to the troops 
that Colombia is about to send to Peru. 

Early yesterday morning the Protector departed. On taking leave, 
he displayed the same cordiality, affection, and sincerity toward His 
Excellency as at their first meeting. 

The Vencedor en Boyacd and the Pichincha battalions embarked 
yesterday for Peru. The Yaguachi battalion had left earlier for the 
same destination. These three battalions number approximately 1,800 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


343 

men, which, with the 800 of the Voltijeros de la Guardia , formerly 
known as the Numancia , make up Colombia’s auxiliary division in 
Peru. 

His Excellency has ordered the Dragones del Sur regiment, under 
Colonel Cestari, to this city, which order has already been communi- 
cated to the Colonel. 

God keep you many years. 

/. G. PEREZ 

Addendum: Tomorrow the electoral junta of this province will meet 
and formally decide by popular vote for the province to incorporate 
with Colombia. There will probably be not a single vote in opposi- 
tion, and then everything here will pursue the normal course it 
should follow at all times under our constitutional system. Vale . 
PEREZ 


151. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Colombia 

[Origincd] 1 

Guayaquil, July 29, 1822. 

My dear General: 

General San Martin left here the day before yesterday during 
the night, following a visit of from thirty-six to forty hours. It was, 
in effect, a visit and nothing more, as we did nothing except ex- 
change compliments, talk, and say good-bye. I believe that he came 
in order to assure himself of our friendship and to make use of it as 
a defense against his enemies, both at home and abroad. With him 
went 1,800 Colombian troops in addition to those already received. 
These will replace his losses, which, for the second time, have cost 
us more than 600 men. Peru will thus have received at least 3,000 
reinforcements. 

The Protector assured me of his eternal friendship for Colombia. 
He promised to intervene in favor of the settlement of boundaries; 
not to interfere in the affairs of Guayaquil; and to favor a complete 
and absolute federation, even if only with Colombia, with Guayaquil 
as the seat of the Congress. He has agreed to send a delegate from 
Peru to cooperate with us in negotiating with the envoys from Spain. 
He has also approved Mosqueras mission to Chile and Buenos Aires, 
recommending that they agree to a federation. He wants our coun- 


*Casa Natal de Bolivar, Caracas. 


344 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


tries to have interchangeable garrisons. In effect, he would have 
everything work toward union, for without it he knows there can be 
neither order nor tranquility. He stated that he does not want to be 
king, but neither does he favor democracy. He would like to have 
some prince brought over from Europe to rule Peru. The latter I 
believe to be only for form s sake. He said that he would retire to 
Mendoza as he was sick of holding the supreme command and of 
being a target for his enemies. 

He did not mention any special purpose in coming, and he made 
no demands of Colombia. The troops that went with him had already 
been detailed for this mission. The one thing that he emphasized was 
the interchange of garrisons; and, on the personal side, there was no 
expression of friendship and support that he did not make to me. 

He impresses me as being very military in character, and he ap- 
pears to be energetic, quick, and by no means dull. He has the type 
of correct ideas that would please you; but he did not strike me as 
being subtle enough to rise to the sublime, whether in the realm of 
ideas or practical matters. You will soon learn more of his character, 
however, from the report of our conversations that I am sending with 
Captain Gomez . 1 The report, I regret to say, lacks the acidity with 
which his every word was uttered. 

The electoral junta of this province today will take up the matter 
of joining Colombia. I believe that they will vote affirmatively but 
will claim numerous benefits and privileges. As I hold the executive 
power [of Colombia] in this area, I shall exercise it over the province, 
allowing the Sovereign Congress, however, freedom to express its 
sovereign will, thereby not endangering its sovereign power. This is 
a case where the division of powers and the scholastic theory that 
the majority should yield to the minority will be of some help to me. 
The fact that now we have succeeded in harmonizing opinions is 
due in no small part to the visit of San Martin, for he completely 
scorned the supporters of independence. This is what I call taking 
advantage of every turn. This praise is not meant for me but for 
him who knows when to flatter even though it be the sage. The 
Prueba and the Venganza would not be in Peru today but for the 
shrewdness of San Martin. But more cannot be expected from these 
simpletons, and so he now places the blame on them. 

Thank God, my dear General, that by great good fortune and with 
much glory I have achieved some very important things: first, the 


1 See Doc. 149 (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


345 

liberation of the south; second, the unification of Colombia, Guaya- 
quil, Quito, and the other provinces; third, the friendship for 
Colombia of San Martin and Peru; and fourth, the departure of the 
allied troops who will win us glory and gratitude in Peru and those 
parts. Everyone is grateful, for I have served everyone; and we have 
the respect of all, for I have yielded to no one. The departing Span- 
iards themselves are filled with respect and gratitude for Colombia. 
There is now nothing more for me to do, dear friend, except to store 
away the treasure of my success, concealing it in some secluded spot 
where no one can take it from me. I simply mean that all that re- 
mains for me to do is to retire and die. I swear by all that is holy, 
that is all I want. For the first time in my life I have nothing left 
to wish for, and I am satisfied with everything. 

Colonel Lara is in command of those corps which are en route, 
and General Valdes will follow him— which is all I have to inform 
you on this occasion. Very affectionately yours, 

BOLIVAR 


152. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Colombia 

[Original] 

Guayaquil, August 3, 1822. 

My dear General: 

I have sent Captain G6mez to Bogotd with the treaty of federation 
concluded with Peru. He has orders to give you all the news in his 
possession regarding Peru and Guayaquil. He will undoubtedly be 
able to inform you extensively about everything, if you have the 
patience to question him repeatedly, as his replies are usually brief 
and he is not inclined to talk. I think that you should draw him out 
on more than one occasion, even writing down his most important 
information concerning the south. In addition, Gomez bears the good 
news that the Guayaquil affair has been decided by acclamation, 
without the slightest disorder. All the partisans of independence and 
of Peru have fled, seeking refuge with the Peruvian squadron. 
Olmedo was the last to go. He left me a letter, a copy of which I 
shall enclose if there is time to make it. All of these gentlemen have 
been treated generously. They have suffered no inconvenience what- 
soever, either large or small, since I have been here. Concerning those 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


346 

who have fled, no questions have been asked, nor has anything been 
done to their property or, of course, to their families. I have professed 
great respect for the members of the government and have treated 
them as though they were fully exercising the duties of their office. 
In other words, my only concern in all this has been to create admira- 
tion for Colombia's moderation. But these gentlemen were not 
satisfied with the procedure of examining their actions while in 
office, even though they themselves had provided for it before their 
fall. I do not intend to make any reference in the public records to 
the behavior of the fugitives, but I shall, however, order replies made 
ready in the event they make any charges in the Lima newspapers. 
It is extremely urgent that I stay in this country for some time, in 
order to promote domestic and foreign politics and also to await the 
outcome of the coming campaign in Peru. In this connection, I want 
to say that I think it vital that we receive by way of the Isthmus two 
thousand rifles and about 200 or 300 quintales of lead, to supply an 
army should the enemy defeat San Martin, which, according to all 
reports, may very well happen. In such an event and should Vene- 
zuela be quiet, let 2,000 men sail from her ports for the Isthmus 
and then here. I am giving this notice ahead of time so that proper 
measures may be taken in advance or at least so that preparations can 
be made. 

From what G6mez will tell you, you will be able to judge how 
much confidence we can place in the good faith of our friends. Lest 
I forget, I will inform you that General San Martin told me, a few 
hours before embarking, that the lawyers in Quito favored having 
these provinces form a state independent of Colombia. I told him 
that I was satisfied with the attitude of the quitenos and that I had 
not the slightest fear. He replied that he had merely mentioned it so 
that I might take proper measures, emphasizing again and again 
the necessity of keeping the lawyers under control and of quelling 
the spirit of insurrection in the towns. Judging from outward ap- 
pearances, he said all this in complete sincerity. Let me add, on this 
particular, that all the clerics in Quito were thoroughly dissatisfied 
with me for not ejecting the Bishop, whom they heartily detest. One 
of them wrote me an anonymous letter filled with scurrilous remarks 
about me on this subject. Recently, the ecclesiastical chapter of that 
same capital of Quito addressed a petition to General Sucre request- 
ing him to secure the resignation of the Bishop, stating that, if he 
did not resign, they would themselves perform the bishop's functions. 

I have given in, for it is not important to me whether or not there 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


347 

are any bishops if those directly concerned do not want them. For 
these and many other reasons, I believe that I should remain in the 
south and that you should arrange the peace preliminaries, convene 
the Congress, and, if possible, maintain order in Venezuela. You can 
do all this as well as I, while I doubt that General Sucre could ac- 
complish what I can in the south. Here everything is new and 
shining. We are known only by reputation and, to speak truthfully, 
our recent conquest of this country has been a quick one; but four 
days cannot suffice to conquer the minds of men, the only solid 
foundation of power. Should I go to Bogota, all the demands of these 
gendemen of Guayaquil, Peru, and Quito would suddenly pour in 
upon poor General Sucre, who, as everyone agrees, possesses every 
laudable trait except energy. I must assure you, in all frankness, that 
despite the apparent quiet prevailing in the south, I compare this 
country to Chimborazo 1 which, though it is very cold without, is a 
furnace within. We definitely need all the authority that I possess 
in order to implant our system in this country. Please understand 
that handicaps had to be met and only the prestige of victory, force, 
and the circumstances of the moment made it possible for us to 
overcome them so readily. To conquer is not enough— it is necessary 
to preserve. You will tell me that the same situation confronts us in 
Venezuela. To which I reply that the ills of Venezuela require 
stronger caustics, as those sores are on the verge of gangrene. Instead 
of political cures, Venezuela has greater need of surgical instruments. 
In summary, let me say that the ills of the south are curable while 
those of the north are, in certain respects, desperate; if they permit 
of any remedy, we must obtain it from this source and from Cundi- 
namarca, Boyacd, etc. I am not needed at the capital, as you and 
the ministers are doing better than I could do. My presence in the 
departments can be of use, but for the present I am useful here, and 
later, perhaps, in Venezuela. In spite of my distaste for the supreme 
command, my patriotism is greater than my distaste, and it always 
forces me to do whatever is most difficult and challenging. I always 
keep in mind, however, that which should prove to be less difficult 
later, so as not to experience the most unpleasant embarrassments in 
the end. 

The Albidn battalion (which has always been wholly English) 
wants to leave and has requested a settlement. You can arrange, by 
indirect means, to have their claim against the government bought 


1 Extinct volcanic peak located in Ecuador (ed.). 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


348 

off so that it will entail less cost than the full expense of the battalion. 
I was going to send them to Peru, but I was told, confidentially, that 
they did not wish to go. It would not do to bring them here, for, as 
this country cannot be relied upon, its garrison must be one wholly 
devoted to us. Moreover, the debt owed to that battalion would con- 
tinue to increase, and payment would ultimately have to be made. 
On the other hand, should these men be needed there, we could 
still use them, for the truth of the matter is that they are not averse 
to serving us; all they want is money. 

I shall leave the Vargas battalion here, which, united with what 
remains of the Albion , will number 400. Add also the Husares de la 
Guardia and the Dragones del Sur with an artillery brigade of ap- 
proximately 100 men, and the total then comes to 700 men. Morales 
will command this garrison, and General Salom will remain as in- 
tendant of the province, although much against his will. They desire 
a department here, though it means dividing the province. Cuenca 
would rather be a part of Quito than of Guayaquil. A commercial 
and agricultural junta is also sought, which I shall permit, as well 
as a court of justice, although it should have two chambers as does 
the Quito court, so that appeal can be made from one to the other. 
This is unconstitutional, but I shall see if I can placate these gentle- 
men. They also insist that the provincial debt be paid before the 
national. I shall also grant this demand, which many support. The 
division of the province would be a costly folly, to which I will con- 
sent in such a way as to render it ineffective. The other things de- 
manded by these gentlemen, of greater or lesser importance, are such 
that the Congress will know how to settle definitely. You will see 
the demands that they have made; later I shall forward those sub- 
mitted by the Board of Trade and Commerce. 

I told General San Martin we should make peace at any price, so 
long as we can obtain independence, territorial integrity, and evacua- 
tion of the Spanish troops from every section of our country, with any 
other conditions to be arranged later, according to time and circum- 
stances. He agreed with me, and I so advise you for your information. 
The information regarding the quitenos and the other matter was not 
included in my report, as I thought them too important to pass 
through the hands of secretaries and outsiders. I feel the same way 
about other parts of our interview which Perez has given to the lads 
at the secretariat. 

At the close of this month, I expect to visit Cuenca and Loja, re- 
turning here through Tumbez in order to inspect our border. The 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


349 

Bogota battalion is to continue to garrison those provinces. The Rifles 
battalion and 300 horses are in Quito with General Barreto. General 
Mires is here, sick; and General Torres, as soon as he feels better, 
wants an assignment in the south. 

Please take note that the district of Ja6n has been occupied by the 
Peruvians and that Mainas, which belongs to Peru by a very recent 
royal order, is also occupied by the forces of Peru. In the end, we 
shall have to give up Ja6n for Mainas and advance our coastline, if 
possible, even beyond Tumbez. I shall make a complete check during 
the proposed trip and submit my recommendations to the govern- 
ment. 

I do not know if I have told you everything that I want you to 
know, for when I begin chatting with you, I do not like to stop even 
though I have nothing else to say. 

Good-bye, my dear General. I remain your most affectionate friend, 

BOLtVAR 

P.S. My respects to my valued friends, the ministers. Also to General 
Urdaneta who has forgotten me. I do not know how he is getting 
along, and I am anxious to know how he feels. 


153. J[os£] G[abriel] P£rez to the Ministers of State 
and Foreign Affairs, Peru and Chile 

[O'Leary XIX, 370] 

General Headquarters, Cuenca, September 9, 1822. 

His Excellency the Liberator has directed me to send this com- 
munication to Your Excellencies. Because of its importance, it is being 
dispatched by special courier, to hasten, if possible, the advantages 
that His Excellency has in view. Although His Excellency the Pro- 
tector of Peru, in his interview with the Liberator in Guayaquil, did 
not express any fear respecting the fate of Peru, the Liberator, never- 
theless, has since given considerable and deep thought to that coun- 
try, arriving at numerous conjectures which, perhaps, although lack- 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


350 

ing in fact, have caused him the greatest anxiety. The Liberator has 
felt it his duty to communicate his fears to the governments of Peru 
and Chile and also to the government of the Rio de la Plata and to 
place the services of Colombia at the immediate disposal of Peru. As 
soon as he receives a reply to this note, His Excellency intends to 
send four thousand men to Peru in addition to those who have 
already been sent, assuming that the government of Peru will see fit 
to accept his offer of these new reinforcements. These troops cannot 
march immediately because they are not ready, nor have they been 
requested by His Excellency the Protector. If the government of Peni 
decides to receive these four thousand men from Colombia, the 
Liberator will expect transports and provisions for their journey, and 
he hopes to be notified in advance in order that all of the new com- 
panies may assemble in Guayaquil in good time. If these forces are 
to be sent to Peru, the Liberator would like the campaign in Peru to 
be so directed as to avoid a decisive battle, until these new companies 
from Colombia arrive. The campaign could then begin promptly and 
with renewed energy as soon as they have been incorporated into 
the allied army. His Excellency does not wish to dwell at length on 
this matter for he does not know the immediate situation. But he is 
exceedingly anxious that the political life of Peru should not be 
compromised, although he is absolutely confident of the results. His 
love for Americas cause has forced him to express these sentiments, 
which he has been unable to repress and which he feels impelled to 
communicate to your government. Further, His Excellency the 
Liberator has asked me to inform Your Excellencies of his subsequent 
plans, should the allied armies not be victorious in the new Peruvian 
campaign. His Excellency wants the remnants of the allied army, 
should it suffer a reverse, to retire toward the north in such fashion 
that it will be able to receive promptly reinforcements of six or eight 
thousand men, who will immediately leave for Trujillo or a more dis- 
tant point. Should the rest of the allied army, by the fortunes of war, 
be forced to fall back to the south, His Excellency hopes that the 
government of Chile will provide it with an equal number of re- 
inforcements, so that by operating in that area the attention of the 
enemy will be divided, while the Colombian army in the north 
moves toward Lima, together with the companies to be raised in 
Piura and Trujillo. Regardless of circumstances, it is the Liberators 
firm intention to do his utmost to save Peru from the Spanish em- 
pire. He accordingly ventures to ask, in all sincerity, that the govern- 
ment of Chile follow his example and, by exerting a similar effort, 



Simon Bolivar 

From an original by Carmelo Fernandez. 










SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


351 

send without delay six or eight thousand men to southern Peru to 
operate with the same or, if possible, greater activity than His Excel- 
lency hopes to display in the circumstances. The Liberator pleads 
strongly that your government do its best to prevail upon the authori- 
ties of the Rio de la Plata to prepare an army of at least four thou- 
sand men for dispatch to Cuzco, should the allied army suffer a re- 
verse. Although such an eventuality is remote, we must not view it 
as such, and, instead, considering it to be ever present, we should take 
every precaution now to wrest victory from the enemy's hands the 
moment he wins it, and not grant him the time to exploit it and 
thereby wreck the hopes of South America. These are the ideas 
which preoccupy the mind of the Liberator at this time. He has asked 
me to impress upon you that he feels they merit your most earnest 
attention. 

I have the honor, etc. 

J. G. P£rez 

A true copy. Perez 


154. To General F[rancisco] de P[aula] Santander, 

Vice President of Colombia 

[Original] 

Cuenca, September 13, 1822. 

My dear General : 

Last night I received news from Guayaquil to the effect that on 
July 21, Augustin I was crowned Emperor of Mexico. It is said to 
have been accomplished by force and that Negrete threatened the 
Congress with death if it did not place Iturbide on the throne. It 
seems that the clergy is disgusted with Iturbide because he asked 
them for three million pesos. The number of nobles has been con- 
siderably increased. Expenses have risen to forty-six millions, with 
an army of only 10,000. It is also said that the governor of Veracruz 
is going to evacuate the town and that the Spaniards will occupy it. 
All of this news was brought by the American frigate Ida, which left 
San Bias and arrived at Guayaquil after a voyage of thirty-two days. 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


352 

I have no doubt but that the report is true, and I also believe that 
Iturbide by his coronation has decided Mexico’s absolute independ- 
ence, but at the expense of the country’s tranquility and even its 
future. There is no doubt but that the clergy are displeased because 
money was requested of them, and that the people are even more 
dissatisfied with the new Emperor as he will be more concerned with 
maintaining himself against the patriots than in destroying the royal- 
ists. Mexico will repeat the story of Lima where more attention has 
been given to erecting a throne than to ridding the country of mon- 
archy. On this score I must tell you that, since my arrival in this city, 
my concern with respect to Peru has increased as a result of what 
Colonel Heres has told me regarding the incompetence of the Peru- 
vian leaders and the ability of their adversaries. I have been assured 
by Heres, whose judgment I trust, that the royalists of Peru, who are 
perfectly capable of maneuvering troops, will triumph if they engage 
the Independents on an open plain. He assures me that the activity 
of the godos is as widespread as is corruption on our side; that the 
absence of discipline, of enthusiasm, of method, in brief, the lack of 
brains among the Independents is in sharp contrast to the qualities 
possessed by the royalists. In short, my friend, this man, who is no 
fool, has filled my mind with anxiety and my heart with bitterness. 
He may, perhaps, exaggerate somewhat, but I am inclined to believe 
that he has adequate reason to judge as he judges and to fear as I 
fear. So now you see me bowed down with cares, debating day and 
night as to what means I should employ in order to muster a large 
army and launch a mighty expedition despite the severest penury of 
the department of Quito, hampered by the petty commercial spirit of 
Guayaquil, and disappointed after so many sacrifices, following the 
most flattering hopes of at last finding respite in peace. 

In the south we have only 2,000 veteran soldiers, or rather soldiers 
of the line, for many of them are just recruits. In Quito these troops 
have not been paid, nor has anybody, for there is not a cent any- 
where. For this reason, and for others unknown to me, our cavalry 
troops have caused a large number of disturbances. I have therefore 
ordered Guayaquil to send sixteen thousand pesos monthly to Gen- 
eral Sucre, and with this the practice of paying no one will end. I 
have also ordered that the lawlessness of these troops be stopped on 
pain of death. But this is no more than a temporary relief; our real 
sacrifices will begin after we have learned of Peru’s first setback. I 
am resolved, therefore, to adopt the most extreme measures in order 
to raise eight or ten thousand men, to maintain, clothe, equip, and 
transport them, if the godos themselves do not come looking for us. 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


353 

Please bear in mind that, after all these sacrifices, and they will be 
heavy and cruel, we shall have made only the beginnings of a feeble 
defense, for, as we shall always be inferior to the enemy in number 
and quality, we shall be exposed to the most serious reverses. Due 
to these circumstances, it is my opinion that the executive power 
should do everything that it can in order to avoid risking the fate of 
the Republic in this way. Should San Martin not triumph in Peru, 
I believe we will have to begin anew. 

Be assured, my dear General, that we shall have more than we are 
able to do the day we learn of the destruction of our troops in Peru. 
Then, though we do everything possible, we cannot hope to match 
our enemies, once they are masters of all Peru and have taken our 
troops prisoners. I speak to you in complete frankness, so that you 
will not leave anything undone that might enable us to check the 
enemy in the south. God grant that San Martin will make no move 
until he has received the 4,000 men that I have promised him. The 
chances of success will then be much greater. 

I arrived here a few days ago, and I have been well received and 
magnificently entertained. The people are quite pleasant, although 
not everyone might agree with me. The country has an air of poverty, 
as there is a shortage of everything except grain. There is grain in 
abundance but no way of transporting it. Here the clergy are every- 
thing and the Indians nothing, because they are few in number and 
poor; hence, not another recruit, they say, can be squeezed out be- 
yond those that the province has already provided our army. Loja 
is said to be a cattleshed, but it is poor and depopulated; Ja6n is still 
in the hands of Peru. Quito cannot support a garrison of even 1,000 
men. Guayaquil will provide six hundred thousand pesos a year, but, 
from what I have seen, I believe that her expenditures will hardly 
be less. From the enclosed memorandum you will see the condition 
of the Kingdom of Quito before the havoc and sacrifices of this cam- 
paign. It took twelve years to wreck Venezuela, but only four days to 
ruin Quito. At least that is what the country's owners say. They 
bemoan their fate as greatly as their counterparts in Venezuela— and 
if I said more so, I would not be wrong, for surely they have equal 
reason to complain. 

I cannot be more optimistic in this letter as there is nothing to war- 
rant any optimism. I do hope, however, that when they give us a 
victory in Peru my language and state of mind will change. 

As the letter that I received from you today tells me nothing, I 
have nothing to say in reply, and with this, good-bye, 


BOLIVAR 


354 


SELECTED WHITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


155. To Fernando Penal ver, President of the National 
Debt Liquidation Commission 

[Original] 

Cuenca, September 26, 1822. 

My dear Penal ver: 

I have not heard from you for a long time, and, as I do not know 
the state of your health, I am inquiring about it and about the posi- 
tion that you have taken or are about to take. I should also be glad 
to learn from you the views and the politics of the people and govern- 
ment of Venezuela, but I wish to know the bad news rather than the 
good, for good news finds it own messenger. 

The liberation of the south has given us four fine provinces. Quito 
is large, handsome, and populous; Guayaquil is incomparable and 
preferable to all the others, and, though it is less populous, it will in 
time produce a million pesos annually. The whole country abounds 
in foodstuffs, is very patriotic, and is devoted to Colombia. The val- 
leys of Quito, though picturesque, are threatened by horrible vol- 
canoes. I greatly fear lest that country be some day consumed in a 
sea of flame, but I cannot find any other faults. I believe that the 
south will be our reservoir in times of crisis, and I am therefore en- 
deavoring to help it as much as possible and in such a fashion that 
each province is favored in some particular way. In short, my friend, 
I plan to better conditions to the greatest possible extent in a country 
that has envious and hostile neighbors, in order that the generosity 
of our behavior may be its surest defense. 

General San Martin came to see me at Guayaquil, and I gathered 
the same impression of him as did those who have judged him most 
favorably, such as Francisco Rivas, Juancho Castillo, and others. I 
have sent 2,500 men from Colombia to Peru. They have arrived and 
have doubtless already taken the field. Not being a prophet, I cannot 
predict the outcome of this struggle, for the two forces are relatively 
equal. I hope to remain in the south until the fate of Peru has been 
decided, for, in case of a reverse, we shall have to make superhuman 
efforts to end the war in these parts. 

Chile has already inaugurated her Congress, and doubtless Lima 
has done the same. The governments of these two nations are royalist 
and the people are republicans; hence bitter strife, and who knows 
at how much sacrifice of justice, exists among the leaders. Iturbide, 
as you must have heard, became Emperor by the grace of Pio, his ser- 
geant major. He will doubtless make a good emperor. His empire will 


SELECTED WRITINGS OF BOLIVAR 


355 

be great and powerful, for his claims are legitimate, according to Vol- 
taire’s dictum which says that the first king was a fortunate warrior, 
alluding presumably to the good Nimrod. I greatly fear that the four 
boards draped in crimson, which people call a throne, cost more 
blood than tears and bring more conflict than peace. Some are prone 
to think that it is an easy matter to put on a crown and to have all 
bow before it. But I believe that the era of monarchy is ended, and, 
until the day that mans depravity goes so far as to stifle the love of 
liberty, thrones will never again be in fashion. You will say that there 
are thrones and altars all over the world, but I shall retort that these 
ancient monuments are all loaded with modern gunpowder, and the 
lighted fuses are in the hands of desperate men who give little heed 
to consequences. 

Good-bye, my dear Penalver. Write me often, and believe me to 
be your very faithful friend, 

BOLIVAR 


156. Francisco Valdivieso, Secretary-General, 
to [Jos£ Gabriel P£rez] 

[O’Leary, XIX, 389] 

Lima, October 25, 1822. 

To the General Secretary of His Excellency the Liberator: 

The Supreme Governing junta of Peru, by virtue of a resolution of 
the Sovereign Congress, has instructed me to reply to your note of 
September 9 last, regarding the plans for the conduct of the war, and 
to express Peru’s gratitude for the generous offers of His Excellency 
the Liberator of Colombia, of which we shall avail ourselves in due 
time. Meanwhile, His Excellency is requested to assist this state with 
the largest possible number of muskets, an item in especially short 
supply. He may rest assured that their cost will be scrupulously de- 
frayed as soon as the straitened circumstances of the public treasury 
have been relieved. 1 

I have the honor of giving you the expression of my high esteem. 

Francisco Valdivieso 








