

SELECT SPEECHES


oir


DANIEL	O'CONNE	,P,----.









"
'∑ ' \



J::DITED, WITH HISTORICAL

BY  HIS SON,

JOHN O'CONNELL	ESQ.

ï
SECOND SERIES






DUBLIN:
IA.MES DUFFY, WELLINGTON QUAY,
.uiD
22, PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON,
1a6e.































rng,ti,od by Google

''.


CONTENTS.






1te Com Laws	ï	ï	.
,,, tholic Aggregate Meeting, A11guet 20, 1015
Remonstrance to Pope Pius Vil. Collision with the Vetoists Bhemi.ah Bible	ï	ï
Public Diwrer to Mr. O'Connell at 'rt-alee
A Union Member
Catholic Mt'Cting	ï
J Letter to the Catholics ot Irelanci Catholic Sub-Sheriff's
/ The Dublin Election
ï Catholic Affairs	ï Catholic Meeting, June 22, 1-820 Meeting  at  Kilmainham ï Letters of Mr. O'Connell		ï
Answer to Mr. O'Connell's Address by Mr. Sheil
ltatue of King William	ï	ï The Marquis of Wellealey.
Statue  to Mr. Grattan	ï
.J .Address to the Catholics of Irelnnd Aggregate Meeting, Febl'lllllj' 13, 1822
National Te<>timonial to George the Fourth
National  Board of Education   ï	ï	ï Distress of the Poor in the South &Dd West of Irelanli Wallace 11. StaUDton-Libe. ï
Orange Demonstrations in Dublill. ï
Mr. O'Connell on Circuit Outrage at the Theatre ï
The Catholic Association	ï	ï
Rev. Michael O'Connor 11. J. T. Harden ud Willi&-.n Glyua
Church Rates
Motion of Thanks to Henry Brougl1am Tithe Commutation Bill
Extension of the Catholic Association Catholic Burying-ground	ï
Catholic As.uciuïjon, o,'llmber 8, 1823
lluriiu l row1da

,.'∑'"'i
I!!
28
ll-
H
fo
51,
57
<l-1
6it It 7{1
i>4
8,1
if
!18
1:Jt
la'4
ï IH
Jl:il
ï 	lW IH 16 ltii> 167 17l
ï 173
18l
18
21.;
211
2:1'
ï 23:I 2:1.5

lV


'Rights of Sepwture	ï
Heport of Burial Ground Commit.ee
,u:1eetiug, November 21, 1828	ï	ï
V V l'etition to Parliament on Catholic GrieTances
Tiu .Dul,m1 Evening Mail
Tithe Bill
£nlergement of the Catholic ,\aaoci:ltioa F.mancipation Rent ï
Meeting, :February 24, 1 B24 Kildare-street A980Ciatiou Meeting, May 15, 1824 ï
Meeting, lllay 22, 182 l Catholic Barristers J>is:mning of Cnangemea The Orange Syït= Meeting, June 5, 1824 Lord Redesdale
Orange Signs-T.11.e Ferman.¢ k,oi. Ribbonmea
Doctor Doyle
:Meeting, June 18, 18:t-l. ï
:Education in Ireland
Calumnies against Mr. O'Conn.:t
J Catholic Rent-Prospects of Emancip,,tion Dinner to Mr. O'Connell
Assaseination  of an Archl"shop	ï	ï Annual Dinner of the Dlru.cbarl!.f ')wt1 Patriotic 1'oc:i.:ty Catholic Newspaper
l'uor Rates	ï l'arliamenwy  Agent Catl.olic F,uance Comr.iitt ïe CII urch Rates		.
1ïro,,pects of Emaneipat\11 Church Rates
athulic J\ genL
Right Rev. Dr. Pluukett
Uible Meeting at Loughrea
.lgb'Tegate Meeting of the Ca:l'JL,. of Ir.-1.u
!\duress  to the People     ï	ï	ï J.etter from Jamee o∑ c w nel F.aq.
fhe Penal Cod&-The Armv neputation to England	ï Petitions to Parliament
The Newïpapera ï


ï £ ∑1
2 6
258
!lG.t
2,a
2G!I
287
irn:4
so;
3),5
82(l
324
32
33>.
333
33G
3,1!1
34'J
3..12
i)..11;
3∑18
:ir,4
afil
1.U:7
:ia
:J7 I
:,-7
HK!
!lllti
iliJ
-ill
.;1∑
'Ila
4:1(
4MI
? H
4 -i ':
4:,0
4;',5
4541

l'roeecntion against Mr. O'Coin.,ill OL ï cha,ge ot' d,>linrfllg tJou
-words	ï	Ul

A=at or Mr. O'Coru:ell
}'blïP  i\lamu, of Flota    ï	ï	ï
lteavlutilll:. !".lo.ti ,e to proceediD£1 against U.. O'C.,Dllf'U
ï 
4ti:4
<(,I);,
-JG7



SELECT SPEECIIES

01'


DANIEL O'CONNELL,	ESQ.,  l\f.P.



l'Bs speech of  Mr. O'Conneft. with whl b we comm.,., e  th!ï  olnmï, wu In  many roapeetl t remarkable orie. In the first pince∑ brlnp om In a rlear light one groat and murk Ing 'feature or h!J poller,  that of stead)" perslatance In tho  use or  tho ways and means that the
∑ 11.1tlt11tlon provld.. for declArlog grlevancoa and den.anding redre.. ; perslstance througll
>every dlsconragecieot, and apparently, but  only  aJIP"reïtly,  against  hope  lt...tr at  time?ï In tile next plaee It preaento a lively plctnre of tne ?tate of things In E'Urope, at the
erlod of the ant Napoleon'ï ftrat abdication-now not tar from rorty years ago; the hope,
∑then   ratlonaily  entertained for  human  liberty-the  opportunities then   before  kings  and
∑ prtnC<ll to g1.,. a permanent and endlll'lllg baal.o In the 11rttefnl all'ectlons of their enfran ï rhlsed aobJï ta, tllronoa and drnutloa,  ret  bn  tromblin1ly  re-eatabllahed after the  terï rlblï hnrr!eana of war and conquest that had for a while ovenet them. To ua, nt preaeoc. 2nxtou apectatora ot t!,e probable beginning of another mighty E ropeao controvera; In
 ,nna; who have had aoch ample material and Cimo to Jodge of the faulta, tho folllea. the nlstakes, and the crimes that were committed In 1816, and tllat have borne such fatal rrult amce (notably so In that year of terrible cllatractlon and d!Juter, an4 of still more torrlblo omen of future eïI, tb.e year 1848), thel'O cannot bo anything more Interesting tl1an the pic≠ ture thla speecl1 glïea of things and eirpectatlon, at the moment In queotlon. ,rhen kln[?I and princes had the destlnle, of nations, u well as their own  In  their  hanas, to  model 'them for  good or Ill, at their  pleasure;  and when  a Utt1" wisdom, a  h&tlo aclf-denlal, ,.
∑Uttle  generosity,  a Uttle  falthfulneu  to  the  prumlsea  by which,  In  former  moments of
∑ deadly peril they bad won the heart-whole support or t11elr people agal11st the l,'reucll
∑Invader, might have aecured the luting peuco and hawlneaa oftbe world I
In  the third  pll&Ce this speech 11 partlcalurly remarkable for the clear, penetrating, anl
declalve view that Daniel O'Connell toek or the  n,,w genen&lly coudomned a11d explode.
-lnJuatlce or the Corn La-	Far otherwt.e  were  thoïï  luw1 at  that  tlrno  than condemned.
!J'hey wen,1oat bolng re-enacted after an lnte"al of  several years;  and  their ro-enïc&menl
waa, at  t11e time we speak of, hailed   by  public speakers and  writers as  a  meaaure of  great
,rladom. In Ireland, e.pe,cllllly, were Ibey hel<t up u eminently calculated to !NI ofbeneftc. ud the aaaomed orpa1 of pnbllc opinion here, and !?deed whutever dogree of publlo opl- 111311 then was actl'l'O am1111ga& 11.1, fullened with a loving faith opon t11e plauslbllltlea OI the 1cheme, and eet down u Ill-Judging, or 111-dlspolld, any one who atlempted to stat tM
∑c w-rent, and 11r119 a calmer and a larger conalderatlon.
,twill be-    how eïe11Kr. O'Connell, himself, popular uhethen 11111, And auto cap,1blï
u ae tbon ïr at any other time lhowed hlnm,I!, of belAg daWlted In any duty be lla4 oï.c

6	!ELECT SPEECHES 01"

1111dïrtaken. ,r-aa obllaed to content hllDllell wttn one brief. bnt clear 1111tl nnmlatakeable denunciation or  the  Corn  Law&  and  to  proceed  with  what dlapatch  he  might,  to  ioplcª more In consonance with the !eelln1111 and persuaalona o! hla auditory.
It will :mo be oeen, that In.truth, the ,.1,o14 .,...agalnat the Corn Lawe Is atated In thla
1peecb, briefly, eacclnctlf, powerfully. 'nlï debatea or 1848, e prooeedlnga ot the anu≠ ComLaw League h> that, or In the bualeat and moot ggumentati?e oC lta aeulOlll p.≠
tllng thnt year o! !ta triumph, may be r11111&cked thronchont, ud not one argument will there be !onnd that could add any thing to the force of Mr. O'CollDell'a declaration made
against thoee lawa, In  the ïerr honr o!thelr projection, when all the  ..-Ill they were calcn≠
kted io produce, and which had become patent and undeniable In 18", were aa yet mat≠ ters o! ïpeculation 1111d prophecy,
Thia remarkable speech enda with another matter ot note- one ot those conïtantly
recnrrmg  proteata   tha&  Mr.  O'Connell   utterfcl. from   time to  Um   Uia:ong)I011t   the   wbele of  hla  long  political  career,  agalnat any  apeclca  oC  compromise  oC   the   entire   Independence o! the Catholic church.
Thedayon -.∑blcb be spoke wu-tbe 23rd oC Febrnary, lBH, and the occuton 11∑aa a C'\tllollc
ï eetlng held npon that day, to consider and decide wbat conne waa tu be punned to recover Catholic right& He Is thua reported l-

  MR. O'CONNELL said that he wished.to submit to the meeting a resolution, calling on the different counties and cities in Ire≠ land to petition for unqualified emancipation. It was a resolu≠ tion which had been already and frequently adopted ; when we had persevered in our petitions, even at periods when wedespo.ired of success ; and it became a pleasing duty to present them, now that the symptoms of the times seemed so-powerfully to promise an approaching relief. ,
  lndeed, as lo:ngas truth or justiee oould be supposed to influence mo.n ; as long as man was admitted to be under the control oi reason ; so long must it be prudent and wise to procure diso.us.≠
!ions on the sufferings and the rights of the people of Ireland. Truth proclaimed the treacherous iniquity which had deprived us of our chartered liberty ; truth destroyed the flimsy pretext nnd.er which this iniquity is continued; truth exposed our merits and our sufferings; whilst reason and justice combined to de≠ monstrate our right-the right of evei,y human being to freedom of conscience-a right without which every honest man must feel. that to him, individually, the proteetion gf government is a mockery, and the restriction of penal law a sacrilege.
  Truth, reason, and justice are our adTocates; and even in Eng≠ land, let me tell you, that those po'11erful. advocates have some authority. They are, it is true, more frequently  resisted  there than in most other countries: but yet they have some  sway among the  English at  all  times.    Passion  may confound,  and
]ïrejudice darken the English understanding; and intere1>ted. passion and hired prejudice have been successfully empkïvi-cl against us at former :periods; but the pl1lt:lent seas1,1u a1ï1> ï.rï

1
liugularly ''∞ell auculateil to aid the  progress of our  caw;e,  and  to advance the . nt t.'\iumont of our important objects.
  I do not mak-:o the t\918rtion lightly. J speak after deliberate investigation, and from  solemn  conviction,  my  cleu  opinion, that we t!hnll, during the present eeBSion of parliament, ubtAin a portion at least, if not the  entfre, of our . emancipation.  \\' e cannot fail, unless we aro disturbed iu our.oouree.by those who graciouely etylo  theD\Slïl\'t'I ow   friends,  or  are betrayed  by  the t reacherous machiuations. of part of our own body;
ï 	Yes, eve ry_ thing, except falsefriendship 11.nd domestic treaohery, forebod-es sucoeae. 'l'hll Cl\use of ma-n is in its great advance. Humanity has been l'Clltmed from ∑much ofits thraldom. In the states of Europe, where the  iron despotism, ,of t he  feudal. system so long. classed men into two species-the  hereditary  masters and the perpet.ualslaves; wheu∑rank supplied the place of.merit.,
Md to be humbly born operated aa a perpetual exclusion ;.,,-i11 many parts of E urop .man is rea&!IUming his natural station, and artificial distinctions have vanished before the fbrce ,o f tru t,h anll the necessities of goyernors. .
  France has -a. rep resentative government; .a.nd as the unjust privileges of the clergy_ and nobility are abolished; as she  is blessed with a  most  wise, clear, and  simple  code  oflaws; 1\11 she is almost freeirom.debt, and emancipated.'from odious  prejudices, she is likely to prove an example and a.light to- t h.e.-wor ld.
  Iii  Germany_ the      sovereigns  who∑ formerly.∑ruled at. their free will and caprice, -ar∑e actually  bribing the ïpeople to  the support of their  thrones,  hy giving them  the  blessings of liberty. It  is a wise and a glorious policy. The Prince Regent has emanci.≠
p!}ted his Catholic subjects of Hanover, &n d traced roF them the
grand  outlines of.a _free constitu tion.    T-he othe-r  states. of Ger≠ many are rap dly.fbllowing the example. The people, no longer destined to bear the burdens only o-f society, are called up to take their share in the maua.gement of their ∑own concerus, and in the sustentation of the public dignity and happiness. In short repre≠ sentative govemmen.t, the only rational or just government, is proclaimed by princes as a  boon to ,t heir  people, and Germany is about to afi'ord many an examJ?.le of.the advantages of rational liberty Anxious as some kings appear to .be iii the great work of.plunder ,an d robbery, others of. them are now the first heralds of fr.eedom.
   It  i& a. moment of  glorioue  triumph  to. h umanit,yï ;   and even one instance .of liberality fl'.eely coucedcd, make.a compensation for a thousand ∑rep PHt fons of tlie ordin1ry crimes of militaey

8	l!ELBCT 13PBECR1r.ll 01'

:nonarchs. The crime is followed by its own punishment ;  but he great principle of the rights of man establishes itself nov
;111 the broa<lest basis, and France and Germany now set forth an ' example for Englaad to imitat9,
  Italy, too, is in the paroxysms of the fever of independence. Oh, may she have strength to go through the disease, and may ehe rise like a giant refreshed with wine I One thing is oertain, that the human mind is set afloat in Italy. The ftame of free≠ dom bums ; it may be emothereci for a season ; but all the whis≠ kered Croats and the fieroe Paudours of Austria will not be able to extinguish the sacred fire. Spain to be sure, chills the heart, and disgusts the understanding. The combined Inquisition and the
.:ourt-press upon the mind, whilst they  bind the  body in fetters of adamant. But this despotism is, thank God, as unrelenting:ly nbsurd as it is ornel, and there arises a darling hope out of the very ei:oess of the evil. The Spaniards must be walking corpses≠ they must be living ghosts, and notbamanbeings, unless a sub≠ lime reaction be in  rapid preparation.  But  let  us turn to our own prospects.
  The cause of liberty has made, !md is making, great progress in stat.es heretofore despotic. In all the countries in Europe, in which any portion of freedom prevails, the liberty of conscience is complete. England alone, of all the states pretending to  be free, leaves shackles upon the -human mind ; E:agland alone, amongst free states, es.hibits the Rbsurd claim of regulating belief by law, and forcing opinion by statute. Is it possible to con≠ ceive that this gross, this glaring, this iniquitous absurdity can continue 1 Is  it  possible, 'too, to  conceive  that it can continue to operate, not against a small and powerless sect, but against the millions, comprising the 'best strength, the most affluent energy nf the empire 1-a. strength and an energy daily increasing, and hourly appreciating then- own importance. The present system, disavowed by liberalized Europe, disclaimed by sound reason, nhhorred by genuine -r ligion, must soon and f<:>r ever be abol≠ it1hed.
Let  it  not  be  said  that  the  priPces ∑of  the  Continent were
forced -by necessity to give privilege11 to their 11ubjects, and that England has escaped from a similar fate. I admit  that  the  ne≠ oessity df procuring the support of the  people was the  mainspring of royal  tia'triotism  on  the  Continent ;  but  I  totally  deny  that the ministers ,of England  can  dispense  with  a  similar  support. The burdens ofthe war a!'e permanent ;  the  distresses occasioned l,_y the  peaoe are pressing ; 't 'lina.ncial eystem t-ot-tering, and to

!>:&NlEt  O'OONNlttoL, ll!Q., Jl.P.	9
be supported in profound peace only by a war taxation. In the meantime, the resouroee of corruption nre mightily diminished. llinieterial influence ie neooeaarily diminished  by one-half of the
. effective force of indirect bribery ; full two-think must be dis≠ banded.	Peculation and corruption must be put upon half-pay, And no allowanoee. The ministry lose not only all those active partizo.ns; those outrageous loyalists, who fattened on the publio plunder durin.g the sea.eons ofimmense expenditure; but those very men will them!l6lves swell the ranks of the malcontents, and proba- . bly be the most violent in their opposition. They have no sweet consciousneee to rewnrd them in their present privations ; and therefore they are likely  to  exhaust  the  bitterness of  their souls on  their late employers.	Every cause conspires to  render  this the period in which the ministry should  have least inclination, least intereet, least power, to oppose the restoration of our rights and liberties.
  I speak not frem mere theory. There exist at this moment practical illuetmtione of the truth of my assertions.  Instances have occurred which demonstrate, ae well the inability of the min≠ istry to resist the popular voice, ae the utility of re-echoing that voice, until it is heard and understood in all its  strength  and force. The ministers had determined  to  continue the property  tn.ii: ; they n.nnounced that determination to their partizans at Liverpool and in Bristol. Well, the people of England met ; they petitioned ; :they repeated-they reiterated their  petitions,  until the ministry :felt they could no longer resist ; and they ungra≠ ciously, but tatally, abandoned their determination ; and the pt∑o≠ perty tR.X now expires.
  Another instance ie also now before us. It relates to the Corn Lam.    The  sucoeeeoftherepetition of petitions  in that instance is the more remarkable, because such sucoess ae  been obtained in defiance of the first principles of politico.I economy, and in vio≠ lntion of the plainest rules of political justioe.
  This is not the place to discuBB the merita of tM Corn Laws ; but I cannot avoid, aa the lfVJject lin in my way, to put upon pul,lic record my conviction o/'l'BE INUTILITY AB WELL AB THE  IMPROPRI  !s'TY OF   T9.B   PROPOBIID   JIEABURE   RESPECTING   'l'HOBE   LAW8.      I e!Cpect
tl i at it will be btlieved in Ireland tliat I tl'ould not volunteer th:ua an oppotition of ,entimmt to any 1/U<UXre, ff I 10aa not most di1- i.nl,erestedly, and in my co1UCience, co-inced t/1,(lt sue& MEAf!URe W(IUL'D NOT BE OJ' ANT BUBSTANTU.L on PERMANENT UTILITY To IR&-
, l. lf O.
As far o.s I um persono. ly oonrern('d, my interest plll.inl; is ta

SELECT-  5PEECH!:S &P

1-:eep up the :;>rioe 0£ lando ; but I am quite OOD'viuoed t.L.o.t tht measure in question will have an effect l'ERHANEN'l\LY AND FATALLY L."(JUa1ous  TO  IREL.urn.     TM  clamour rupecung the  Corn Law,
   been fomented, by paraon, who were afraid that they would not get  money enaugk  for  their tuke,,  and ab&enue  landlords, who
:,.pprehended a diminution <if tkeir rack rtnt&; and if you ob. served the namos ofthoee who have taken an active part in favoUI of the measure, you, will find amongst them many, if not all, thï persons who have most distinguished themselves against the li≠ berty o.ud religion of the people. There ha.ve been, I know, many good men misled, and many clever men deceived, ou this sub≠ ject ; but the great maJority are of the class of oppressors.
  There was formed, some time ago,,an association of a singuru nature in Dublin and the adjaoent counties.  Mr.  Luke White was, o.s I remember, at the head ofit. It contained some of om stoutest and most stubborn seceders : it published the  causes of its institution; it recited tho.t, w.hereas butcher's meat  wo.s dearer in  Cork, and in  Limerick, and in Belfast than in  Dublin, it was therefore expedient to assooiate,  in order that the people of Dublin should not eat meat too_.cheap. Large sums wer& subscribed to carry the patriotic de11ign into effect, but public indignation broke up the ostensible confederacy; it wo.s  too plain and too glaring to bear public inspection. The indignant sense of the people of. Dublin forced them to dissolve their open nssociation ; and if the present .. enormous increase of. the price of  meat  in  Dublin  beywd the  rest  of  Ireland  be the   result  ot
,ecret combination of any individuals, there is at least this com≠ ort,  that they do not presume to beard  the public w.ith  the open.
.i. vowal of their design to increase. tha.diffiaulties of .the poor in
procuring food.
  Such a scheme as that, with respect to. meo.t  in. Dublin≠  such a scheme, precisely, is the sought-for corn law. The only rlifference consists in the extent of ,the operation of both plans. The corn. planu: only more extensive, not moreunjust in principle, but it is more unreasonable in iu operation, because its neeu1ary tend,ncy mwt lie to <kstroy t/w,t very mark.et of wki,cl,,. it ,eek, the t:rclusiw poauuion. 'l'he oorn law men.want,.th,y aay, to kave the ezclmive fecd,ing of the 'ITW,nuf actwr.era ; bait at prumt, ow manti-≠ facturers, loaded a., tkey are wit!,, tazatwn, are acar-cely. ablt to
, et the goo<h of fo1:eigners in .the markets of the world. The English are already undersold in. foreiga markets ; but, if to thu
.Jcarnes, prod∑uced, by tazation, tlte1ïe akaU be added, tM dea1'MII..
1,1,'0duccd bv, cuar food, is it not ªlain that it. will be. imp988ihle.

DAJ\'IEL   O t:ONNDLL   ESQ∑H.P,	11'
to enter into a competition with foreign manufacturers, who l1ave∑ no taxes and cheap bread 1 'l'hus the corn laws will destroy our manufactures, and compel our manufacturers to, emigrate, in spite of penalties ; and the corn law supporters will have injured themselves and destroyed others.	∑
  I beg pardon for dwelling on thissubject.  If I were at  liberty t-o pursue it here, I would not leave it untff I had satisfied every dispassionate man, that the :proposed measure is both USELESS AND  UNJUST;   but  this is not  the  place  for  doing so,  and  l only
beg to record at least the honest dictates of  my .iudgment  on tl1is interesting topic, My argument, of∑the efficacy of peti≠ tioning,  is  strengthened   by  the  impolicy  of  the   measnre  in
question ;: because, if petitions, by their number and perseverï ance, succeed in establishing a proposition impolitic in principle,. nnd oppressive to thousands in operation, what encouragement does it not afford to us to repeat  our petitions for  that∑ whic!J bas justice for its basis; and policy as its support I
  'fhe great advantages of discussion being thus apparent, tlie efficacy of repeating, and repeating, and repeating again our pu≠ titions being thus demonstrated by notorious facts, the Catholica of Ireland must be sunk in criminal apa.thy, if they neglect tlur use ofan instrument so efficacious for their emancipation.
  There is further encouragement at this particular crisis. Dis≠ sion has cease(rin the  Catholic  body.  Those  who  paralysed our efforts, and gave our conduct the appearance and reality ot weakness, and wavering, and inconsistency, have all retired. Those who were ready to place the entire of the CathoHc feelin and dignity, and some of the Catholic religion  too,  under  the feet of every man who pleased to call himself our friend, and to prove himself our friend, by praising on every occasion, and uponï 110 occasion, the oppressors of∑the Catholics, and by abusing the Catholics themselves; the meri who would linkthe Catholic cause≠ to this patron and to that, andï∑sacrifice rt at one time to the mi-ï nister, and at another to the∑epposition, and make it this day the∑ tool of one party, and∑the next the instrument of another party , themen,in fine,whohoped to traffic upon ourcountry and ourreli-≠ gion-who would buy lionours, andtitlee,and places, and pensions, nt the prioe ofthe purity, and dignity, and safety of the Catholio Church in Ireland; all those men,have,  thank God, quitted us, hope for ever. They have returned into 'Silence and secession, or have frankly or covertly gone over to our enemies. I regret deeply nnd bitterly that they have carried with them some few,  who,. like my Lord Fingal, entertain no.other motiv.cs tllan; those off

-12	SEL!':CT SPEECIIES O!'

purity and integrity, :and who, like that 11ul.lc lu1J, al'e merely mistaken.
  But I rejoice at this separation-I rejofoe that. they have left the single-hearted, and the disinterested, aud tlte indefatigable, and the independent, and the numerous, aud the 'B'incere Catho≠ lics to work out their emancipation unclogged, ttnshackle<l. and undismayed. They have bestowed on us auoth.er bounty also≠ they have  proclaimed the  causes of their secession-they have
.lillceci out of doubt the cause of the divisions.    It  is not in tem≠
∑perance, for that we abandoned ; it is not the introduction of extraneous topics. for those we disclaimed; it is simply ami purely, veto or no veto-restriction or no restriction-no other words ; it is religion and principle that have divided us; thanks,
:::iany thanks to tbe tardy and remote candour of the seceders, that has at length written in large letters the cawe of their aeces≠ sion-it is the -Catholic Church ef Ireland-it is whether that Cliurch shall∑oominue independent of a Protestant ministry or not. We are for its independence-the seceders are for its dependence.
  Whatever shall be the fate of our emancipation question, thank God we are divided for ever from  those  who would wish that our Church should crouch to the partizans of the Orange system. Thank God, secession has displayed its cloven foot, and avowed itself to be synonymous with vetoiam.
  Those are our present prospects of success. First, man is elevated from slavery almost every where, and human nature has oecome more dignified, and, I may say, more valuable. Second!:, Eng-land  wants  our  cordial  support,  and  knows  that  she has
 ?nly to concede to us j11stice in order to obtain our affectionate assistance. 'l'hirdly, tllis is  the  season of  successful  petition, and the very fashion of the times entitles our petition to suocee´i. Fourthly, the Catholic ca.use is disencumbered of hollow friends, an,l interested speculators. Add to all these the native and in≠ herent  strength  of  the  principle  of  religious  freedom,  and tne
-inert and accumulating weight of our wealth, ∑our religfon, au∑i our num''bers, and where is the sluggard that shall dare to doubt our approaching success 1
  Resides, even our enemies must concede to us, that we act from principle, and.from principle only. We prove our sincerity 'l'ihen we refuse to m11.ke our -ema?loipation a subject of traffic and ba1∑≠ r,    at.i ask  for relief  on y upon  those  grounds  which,  if once
?sto.blished, would give to every other sect the right to the same
(l?litic l immunity.  _All w? sk  is '' n. clear st.a e aud no fa".our."
\\. e tlunk tJie C11.t:holtc relig10u He most 1ïailo1,1aU.y et>u&ste1.1t



, v : i1 the divino scheme of Christianity, and therefore, all we nsk is. that everybody should be left  to  lus  unbiassed  relU!lm  aud 'j udgment. If Protesta?tts are e ually sincere, why do they caU the lnw, nnd t.he bribe. nnd the pince, nud the pension, iri suppol't
of their doctrines 1 Why do they fortify themselves behind pnius, and penalties, and exclusions, and forfeitues1 Ought not our op≠ ponents to feel that they degrade the sanctity of their religion, when they call in the profane aid of temporal rewards and pun≠ ishments, and that  they proclaim  the  Bllperiority  of  our creed,
∑ when they thus admit themselves unable to ∑contend against it upon terms of equality, and by the weapons ofrenson and argu≠ ment, and persevere in refusing us all we ask-" a clear stnge ana no favour."
  Yes, Mr. Chairman, our enemies in words and by nctious, admit and proclaim our superiority. It∑ remains to our fricmls alone, and to that misguided and ill-advised portion of the Ca≠ tholics who have shrunk into secession-it remains for thol!6 friends and seceders alone to undervalue our exertions, anu unue1∑- 1-at.e our conscientious opinions.
  Great and good God, in what a cruel situation are the Catho≠ lics of Ireland placed ! If they have  the manliness  to tnlk  of their opp1-essors as the paltry bigots deserve-if they have the honesty to expresa, even in measured language, a small portio11 of the sentiments of  abhorrence  which  peculating  bigotrJ ought naturally to inspire-if they condemn the principle whict established the inquisition in Spain, and Orange lodges in Ire land, they are a.ssa.iled by the combined clamour of those parli, mentary friends, and title-seeking, place-huutiug scceders. 'J'hr war-whoop of "intemperance" is sounded, and a persecution iï instituted by our adv<X;&.tes and our seceders-against the Catho lie who dares to be honest, and fearless, and independent I
  But I tell you what they easily forgive-nay, what our friends sweet souls, would vindicate to-m ow in parliament, if the sub≠ ject arose there. Here it is-here is Tlie .Dttbliti Journal  oftLe  21st of February, printed just two days ago. 111 the adwinistra≠ t1on of Lord Whitworth, and the secretaryship of Mr. Peel, there ia a government newspaper-a paper supported solely by the money of the people; for its circulation ia Jitt1e, and its p1:ivate advertisements leBB. Here is a paper continued. in  exirlh>nrt like a wounded reptile, only whilst in the rays of the sun, bv the Lent and warmth communicated to it by the Irish administra'tion. l.et me read two p11l!l::11ges for you. 'fl1e fin1t <:IIU!! "Popery t, J,
; d,∑o.Jlv  etllnllV    ,11,u,∑e  t∑d i!)i11u cmd  n,ti11u:t/   Iii,",,...  Such a

8ELhUT   BPKBIJ.liEfi OW

the temperate tleacription the writer gives of the <Jatholic faith. With respect  t0  purity of religion  I  shall not quarrel  with him.   I only differ wil!b. him in poin of taste; but I should be glad to know what thie∑creature  calls rational  liberty. I  suppose  such as existed at Lacedmmon-the dominion of Spartans over Helots-tbe despotism of masters over slaves, that is his rationai liberty. We∑will readily paas so∑much by. But attend to this :-
  " I will," says this moderate and temperate gentleman,  "  la!, before tl,,e reader ,ucl,, apecimem of the POPISH SUPERSTITION a, will convince him tl,,at the treaaonable comhinationa ce1Mnted by  oath,, and the NOCTURNAL, ROBBERY AND ASSASSINATION which ltave pre≠ tJailed   for   many   yeara  paat  in  Ireland,  and  atilt ezi,st  in   many
JJarta of u, ,1,re  produced a,  a neceaaary comequence by ua intole≠
rant aftd aanguinary principles."
Let our seoeders--let our gentle friends who are shocked at
.:>ur intemperance, and are alive to the mild and conciliating vir≠ tues of Mr. Peel, read this passage, sanctioned i may almost say, certainly countenanced by those who do the work of governing Ireland. Would to God we had but one genuine, unsophisticated friend, one real advocate in the  House of Commons I  how  such a man would pour down indignation on the clerks of the Castle, who pay for this base and vile defamation of Ollr religion-of the religion of nine-tenths of the population of Ireland I
  But, perhaps, I accuse falsely; perhaps the administration of Ireland are guiltless of patronizing these calumnies ; look at the paper nnd determine ; it contains nearly five columns of adver≠ tisements-only one ∑from a private person--and even that is a notice of an anti-Popery pamphlet, by a Mr. Cousins, a curate of the Established Church. Dean Swift has somewhere observed, that the poorest of all possible rats was a curate-(much laugl,,. inr,) ,∑ and if this rat be so, if he have as usual, a large family, a
great appetite, and little to eat, I sincerely hope that he may get what he wants--a fat living. Indeed for the sake of consistency, and to keep up the succession of bad pamphlets, he ought to get a living.
  Well, what, think you, are the rest of th advertisements I First, there are three from the worthy Commissioners of Wide Streets; one dated 6th August, 1813, announcing that they wculd, the ensuing Wednesday, receive certain proposals. Secondly, the Barony of Middlethird is proclaimed, as of the fith of September last, for fear the inhabitants of that barony shoui.1 not as yet know they were proclaimed.  'l'hirdly, the pro≠
cl: mation against the Ca.tholio Board, dated only the 3rd day of

'

DANIEL O'CONNELL, Kt.,Q., .:M,P,

1-une last, is printed .lest any person should .foQJ0t the ,history (,f
la-,t  year.    Four.thly  there  is  proclamation   stating  that  gun≠
-powder was not to -be carried coasttoile .for six months, and thii; is dated the 5th of October last. But why should  I  detain you with the details of state proclamations, pr..inted for no other pur≠ pose than as an excuse for putting so much of the public mone:, into the pocket,of a calumniator of the Catholics. The abstract af the rest is that thereis one other proclamation, stating that Liver≠ pool is a .port fit .for importation from the East Indies ; anoth&∑ forbidding British sul:>jects from serving .in the American forces
.during the present, that is, the past war ; and  another  stating, that although we had made peace with .France, we ar.e  still at war with America, and that, therefore, no marine is io  desert.; and to finish the climax, there is a column and a  half of  ex≠ tracts from several statutes; all this pr.intcd at the ex,peuse of government, that is at the expense of the .people.
  Look now at the species of services for -which so eoormous a sum of our mone.,y is thus wantonly lavished! It consiijts simï ply of -oalumriies against the Critholio ,reliijion-calumnies so virulently atrocious, as, in despite of the intention of the authors, to render themselves .ridiculous. This hire1iqg aocuses our re≠ ligion of being an enemy to liberty, of being an enooumger of treason, of instigating ,to robbery, and .produoing a system o( assassina.tion. Here are libels for which no,prosecution is instiï tuted. Here are libels which are considered worthy of enconï mgement, and .which are rewarded  by the Irish .treasury.  .Aml is it for this-is it to supply this waste, this abuse of publfo money-is it to pay for those false and foul calumnies, that we are in a season of universal ,peace, to be borne down with a war tux≠ ntion 1 Are we to have two or three additional millions oftn:x.es imposed upon us in peace, in order that this intestine war of atrocious calumI!y ma,y be carried on against the religion of the people of Ireland, with all the vigour of full pay, and great plunder1 Let us, agitntors, be now taunted by jobbers in par≠ liament with our violenoe, .our intemperance. Why, if we were not rendered patient by the aid of a dignified contempt, is there not matter enough to tlisgust, and to irritate almost beyond en- durance 1	∑
  Thus are we treated by our friends, and our enemies, and our teceders ; the first abandon, the second oppress, the third betray 1s, and they all join in calumniating us ; in the last they are all combined.    See how  naturally  they associate ;-this  libeller in
7'he D1tblin Jour1w./, who calls the Catholic religion a system ot

16	111.tLIWT SPEECHES 011'
asBMSinrition, actually praises in the same paper, some iu livi≠ dual Catholics; he praises, by D&me, Quarantotti, and my Lor,i Fingal (much lau!lhing) ,∑ and the respectable party (those are his words) who join with that noble lord.
  Of Lord Fingal I shall always spee.k with respect, because l entertain tho opinion that his moti'9'81l are pure and  honouraolc ; but can  anything,  or  at  least  ought anything  place  his  secession n so strong a point of view to the noble lord  himself, e.s to  find  that he and his party are praised  by  the  very  man  who, in  the next breath, treats his religion as a system of 8.8118.SBination. Let that party have all the enjoyment which  such praises  can  confer; but if a spark of love for their :religion or their  country  remains with them, let them recollect that they could have earned those praises only by  having,  in  the  opinion  of  this  writer,  betrayed tho one, and degraded the other.
  This writer, too, attempts  to  traduce Lord  Donoughm-0re. He attacks his lordship in bad English, and worse Latin, for ha,∑≠ in , e.s he says. cried peccavi to Popish thraldom. But the h!≠ norant trader in virulence knew not how to spell that single Laun word, because they do not teach Latin at the charter schools.
  I close with conjuring the Catholics to persevere in their pre≠ sent course.
  Ld- ua neve:rtolerate the alightut inroud on the diacipline of our ancient, our Aoly 0n'IJJ1'Clb.	Let  us  never consent  that she shonl,1 he   made  the   hireling  of' the  ministry.	Our forefather, wonfd have died, nay, they perittl,,ecl in hopeleu alavery, rather than con 1ent t" s11,ch degradation.
  Let us rest upon the barrier where they expired, or go baci into 1la1iery, rather than forward  into  irreliflion  and  diagrau I  Let w also advocate our cause on the two great ptlnciples---first,
, that of an eternal separation  in spirituals  between  our Church and the state; secondly, that of the eternal ri.gli.t to.freedom nJ conscience--a. right which, I repeat it witli pride and pleas;1re, would exterminate the Inquisition in Spain, and bury in oblivi<,n the bloody orange :ftag of dissension in Ireland !

lfr. O'Connell conclnde-1 b7 moTlna bla H110lntloo, calllng on the eeoenl comrtlo, tot
Jlf'tltlon.	.	.
  Wlth reterence to the matten t.onche4 upon In the concluding pan or the IIJlffCh Ju'!S ven. we may, In puain,i, record that the apring and 1111Dmer of 1816 wftneued mAnf
proofs tllat the heart of Ireland wu IODDd; and In Angnat of the aame :rear 1llle pub;,.≠ mlnd wu cheered by the following dN!laradon ar the blahOJ,S:-
  " Ata meeUngofthe Roman Catholic pn,!Atea of Jrelaad.  heid In  Dublin,  Mttªttnt at:d t4tb of Auiinst, 1816, the fnllowln;  reaolntlona  wure WWII-IIIIT 1111ï ª-∑Ille )lo.,& Rn. Dr. Kelly, i,realde!!Lï-

DANIEL  o\;oKIS£JJ,,  ESQ., M.r .	17
'"REBOI,Vl!:D-That  it  1s  our    decided   and  conscientious  convictiot.
∑ t hat any power granted to the crown of Great Britain, of interferinr directly or indirectly, in the appointment <>f BiHhops for the Romon Catholic Church in Ireland, must essentiall1 injure, and may eventua!ly subvert , the Roman Catholic religion in this country.
 "RESOLVED-That, with this conviction deeply  and  unalterably impressed on our minds, we should consider ourselves ns betraying the dearest  interests  of  that  portion  of  the  Church  which  the  Holy  Ghost has confided to OU!\ care, did we  not  declare,  most  unequivocally,  that we will at  all  times,  and  under  all  circumstances, deprecate and oppose, in every canonical and constitutional way, any such interference
  "REl!OLVl!:D-Though we sincerely venerate the supreme pontiff' visible head of the Church, we do not  conceive  that our apprehensions for the safety of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  in Ireland  can or  ought 10 be removed by any determination of bis Holiness, adopted, or intende.! to be adopted, not only without our concurrence, but in direct  opposi≠ tion to our repeated resolutions, and the very energetic memor pre≠
, ented on our behalf, and so  ably supported  by  our. deputy,  the  Moe& Ilev. Dr. Murray; who,  in  that  quality,  was  more  competent  to  inform hia HolineBB of the real state and intere &ts of  the  Roman  Catholio Church in  Ireland, thnn  any other  with whom  he  is  &aid  to  have  co11- s ulted.
  "RESOLVED-That a declaration of these our sentime11ts, respectful, firm, and decided, be transmitted to the Holy See, which, we trust, will enga e his Holiness to feel and acknowledge the justness and propriety
.,f this our determination.
   'RESOLVBD-'fhat our  grateful  thanks  are  dne, and  hereby  given, to the Most  Rev. Dr.  Murra;r,  and  the  Right  Rev.  Dr.  Milner, our late deputies to Rome, for the1.r zealous and able discharge of the truet reposed in them.
" OLIVER KELLY, Presiue11t..
" Richftrd O'Reilly.	Farrell O'Reilly, Kilmore.
J . T. Troy.	.	P.  Ryan, Fems.	∑ Thomae Bray, Cashel, (proxy). Charles Tuohy, Limerick
P.  Everard, Coad. Cashel.	G. P lunket , Elpbin.
D. Murray, Coad. Dublin.	John Murphy, Cork.
Pat.  Jos. Plunket, Meath.	PatrickMïMullen,DownandConnor William Coppinger, Cloyne.	Kyran Marum, Ossory.
Thomas Costelloe, Clonfert.	Peter M'Loughlin, Raphoe. Charles Sughrue, Kerry.	James Murphy, Clogher.
John Power, Waterford.	Edmund Derry, Dromore.
Charles  O' Donnell, Derry.	Mich. IJorcoran, Elect, Kildare l\nd
.J ohn O'Flinn, Achonry.	Lei i;thlin.
l>ctcr Waldron, Killala.	James MïGaura n, Elect. Ardagb .
J arurs O'Shaughnessy, Killaloe. Edmond F:rencb, Warden of Gd-
VOL   II	\Vfl.Y "	B

HI	SELECT SPEEOBES OF
 Thlo document drew from the Catholic laity the following e.i:presslon1 of ptltul! an3 delight:-	ï

"CATHOLIC AGGREGATE MEETING.ï
"TUESDAY, 29TH AUGUST, 1815.
  "RESOLVED-That we deem it our first and most pleasing duty to upress, in the strongest terms which our language can afford, our per≠ fect confidence in, and esteem and veneration for, and gratitude to the most reverend and right reverend the Catholic prelntes of Ireland ; and these our unanimons sentiments are deeply and everlastingly impressed ou our minds, by their firm, manly, and decided condemnl\tion of any measure, giving to the crown, or the se"anta of the crown, any control whatsoever over the appoi tment of our bishops, inasmuch as any such measure must necessarily tend to destroy our religion, and also mate≠ rially injure the civil rights and  liberties of  the people of  Ireland, of all classes and denominations.	∑
  "RESOLVED-That our .chairman be requested to wansmit, in terms of the most affectionate respect, our most cordial gratitude to those learned. exemplary, and pious clergymen, Archdeacon Blake, Doctors Lube and Darcy, and to the other reverend  and estimable clergymen of the second order of the Irish Roman Catholic hierarchy, who ham concurred with them in constant and unqualified opposition to the abhorred veto in all its shapes and form?ï
  "RESOLVED-That we cannot omit this occasion to publish to the world the fervent tribute of our livel1 gratitude and most profound reverence for the officiating Catholic priests of Ireland ; a class of men uniformly distinguished by the most um-emitting zeal and activity, and by the most incessant charity and disinterested purity, in discharge o their sacred duties ;-me1. ïifhom no dangers have terrified, no perse≠ cution has ever deterred, no seduction has ever led astray, aud no temp≠ tation could ever bribe, from the faithful discharge of their duties ; and vho have obtained, as they have well deserved, the heart-felt admira≠ tion of all the persons of their own permwiion, and the decided appro≠ bation of the liberal and enlightened of every other religion.
  "RESOLVED-That the CatholiCI! o Ireland having, on their solemn onth, declared that the Pope has not, and ought not to have, any tem≠ pornl or civil jurisdiction, power, superiority, or pre-eminence, directly
)r indirectly, within this realm; we cannot, without exposing ourselves and our religion to just derision and reproach, and also without incur≠ ring the dreadful guilt of perjury, consent to any arrangement by which the British minister maJ derive from the Court of Rome any jurisdic≠ tion or  power over  the  tranli8ctions  in civil life, and conduct in em≠
poral affairs, of the Roman Catholic clergy in Ireland, and that our resigtance to any such arrangements, instend of operating in our dis≠ farour in the mind of any just and rational statesman, ought, 011 the contrary, to convince him that we deserve liberty, as well because such
conduct  furnishes  one   more  powerful  instance  of  their conscieut.ioas
ï Then re?olutlon1were dra"'" up by llr. O'Conuel!.

DA.."i'IEL O'OONNL1LL, ESQ., JLP.	]!)

adherence to the obligation or an oath, as because it prov;,JII that we practically distinguish the spiritual authority or his Holiness the Pope, which we always fully recognise, from any civil or tem oral power or authority in  him, or derived from  him, which  we disclaim,  and would if necessary, resist at the peril of our lives."
  Wl1en the fourth resolution waa put, Kr. 0-CouJell came forward and spoke at conslder≠ i.ble length. The following lo the beat extract we can give of his speech:-
  This, said he, is a day of gratulation and triumph. The sen≠ timents of delight which we experience are pure and unmixed. Our great cause is at length placed on its proper basis. Win or lose, we are sure our religion  cannot  suffer.  Our question  is now stripped of all the intricacies and details in which it was involved by false friends and perfidious co-operators. It reduces itself simply and singly to ∑this-shall we be emancipated as. Catholics, or as Catholics continue slaves 1
  Every attempt to  barter  religion  for  libe1∑ty-(lvery scheme to traffic upon our faith, for civil benefits, is destroyed for ever and this additional advantage results among ourselves, that the unanimity of the Irish Catholics is now secure from all danger. As one great mass of weight and consistency, we should now proceed towards the attainment of liberty. The seceders are deprived of every excuse, of every colour or pretext for division. No man who continues to secede, can pretend to sincerity as l!. Catholic, or purity as an Irishman.
  The secession originated in the concealed desire to facilitate the ministerial arrangements with the Pope and the bishops. Secession was afterwurds justified on the avowed grounds of per≠ mitting such arrangements to take place unimpeded by the laity; but now that those arrangements are impossible-now that the bishops have declared their  irrevocable  opposition-now  that they have declared that ministerial interference MUST EStlEYTIALLT INJURE, AND KAY DESTROY the Catholic religiQn in  Ireland.;  where is the man who can get credit for his pretence of being a Catho≠ lic, who still continues his secession, to favour that which the highest and most revered authority has told him must essentially injure, and may destroy his religion 1 Oh no, if the seceders be sincere, and some, at least, amongst them, I am at present con≠ vinced are so-if they be honest, they will now send in their adhesion, and rejoin the ranks of their struggling countrymen.
. It is unnecessary, I am sure, to prove  that  no  seceder  can now lay claim to pure devotion to his country. They cannot rrquire us to believe that they are honest as politicians, or faith≠ fw as !::ishmen, whilst the,1 endeavour to add to the corrupt

20	!IELEC,'T 8PEECm:8 oï
influence of Lord Castlereagh, and strit ! to increa.i che power in Ireland of  the  worthy  champion  ol' Orangeism-Mr.  Peel. 'At  the mention of  Mr. Peel's name th-	wo.s muoh la ughing.)
You mistake me, said Mr. O'Connell.  I rlo not-indeed, I <lv
hot intend this day to enter into the merits of that celebrate<\ statesman. All I shall say of  him,  by way of  parenthesis,  is,  that I am told he has in my absence, and in  a  place  where  he was privileged from any account, groBBly traduced me. I said, 11t the last meeting, in the presence of the note-takers of the police, who are paid by him, that he was too prudent  to att:i.ck me in my presence. I see the same police informers here  now, and I authorize them carefully to report these  my  words,  that Mr. Peel would not DA:aE, in my presence, or in any  placJ where he was liable to personal account, use a single expressio:i rlerogatory to my interest, or  my honour.  And  now  I  have done with the man, who is just fit to be nothing but the cham≠ pion of Orangeism. I have done with him, perhaps for ever.
I return to our proper topic of joy a d exultation !
  Our prelates have amply justified the veneration  in  which hey are held. Never were there men more respected and re≠ vered. No men ever deserved so much respect and  reverence. But the gratitude they have  merited,  and  the  triumph  they have won, is rendered doubly delightful by its being exclusively Irish. It belongs to Irishmen alone ; not a foreigner has any claim to it.
Our church was either  betrayed  or sold  to  the  British minis≠
ter at Vienna; indeed, the exact amount of  price  is. stated to be eleven thousand guineas. Though cardinal, the agent was not a priest. Quarantotti, and Cardinal Litta, were, of course, foreigners. Then the next class in the arrangement of the veto are the  English Catholic bishops.  First of all, I must mention n name that ought not, perhaps, though it will surprise you≠ Doctor Milner. Yes ; Doctor Milner has performed another truly English revolution.   He  was the first  to broach thti veto.
:::-Ie came to Ireland on a vetoistical mission ; the Irish rejected the  mission and  the  missionary.     He then recanted  his errors≠
:renounced his first opinions-abjured them-and we sustained him for his anti-vetoistical principle.
  Well, what has occurred now1  Why,  Doctor Milner  has gone round again, and has actually written to the bishops to ac≠ cede to Litta's plan of veto. Mimer's letter was  read  at  the synod ; it was, I understand, an official document ; of its con.
∑ tcuts I oan give you certainly a.n n.bstract, because its contents

D,L,IEL  O'CONNELL, ESQ., lt.!'.	21
have been communicated to me by one of our prelates, whose name, if necessary, I am at full liberty to use. His letter re≠ '1uested  of  the  bishops  to  accede  to  the new plan of  veto.   It
..itated that the government would not be satisfied with so little; 'that it would require more;  and, therefore, concluded  the cnn≠
-:lid prelate, you may with safety accede to his plan ; it  will never be brought into operation, and you will have the grace of showing your acquiescence, without any danger to the Church. (Loud laughter.)
  But well knowing that there was sometning in the Irish un≠ derstanding that would scorn such advice, he proceeded to state and to solve the following ingenious dilemma :-"  Either (says his letter) the candidate for episcopacy in Ireland will be dis≠ loyal, or he will not be disloyal. If he be disloyal, we would all (continues Doctor Milner) be rejoiced that he lost the bishopric." Now, I beg just to inquire  the meaning of  the word disloyalty. In this country it generally means  disinterested attachment  to the rights and liberty of  Ireland.  The  more honest, zealous, and pure is the love of any man for his native land, the  more certain he is of being charged with disloyalty ; whilst on the other hand, we see plunder, and torture, and murder called loyalty. But mark, I pray you, how Doctor Milner treats tho other  horn of  the dilemma.    "If	(says he) the candidate be a. loyal man, and that thA British ministry shall strike out  his 11ame, on a suspicion of his disloyalty, he will have an excellent Rction at law against the British minister."  Yes;  an action at law by an Irish parish  priest  or friar against the prime minister cf England, for exercisinv, a discretionary power vested in him! The most zealous apostle of the veto is another English pre≠ late (Doctor Poynter).	Poor man l his principal means of sup≠ p:>rt depended an the uncertain gratuity of a few of the upper class (as they are called) of English Papists;  he would  pzefer the more solid engagement of a permanent pension from govern≠ ment. He exerted every nerve to carry this ruinous measure. "You owe all your safety and success to the Catholic bishop,
of Ireland. They have defeated every argument ; they have withstood every seduction ; they have disappointed every un≠ hallowed expectation. What an idle pretext is this anxiety to ascertain their loyalty ! I challenge the calumniators of every class-calumny prospers in Ireland-it is the best tra´lu going. Well, I challenge tho host of calumniators to point out 11, single instance in which, since the :Revolution, an Irish Cath"l1c bishop was ch ged with disloyru.ty.

22	111!:LECT IIPDCBES OP
  Away with this vile pretence; it is political power the minister v,ants. He desires, too, to get rid of your religion, because jt !I troublesome ; but his great object  is to increase his influence-:≠ to enlarge the number of his retainers-to ,give corruption a
-nore extended sphere of action, that the very name of liberty n:ay be blotted out, and ministerial management take the place of constitutional control. We have opposed the veto as Catho≠ lics ; our worst fears havo been confirme<l by the decisive autho≠ rities of the bishops. Their words contain such a justification of our resistance that I must  repeat  them. They  say-" lt must essentially injure, anrl may subvert, the Catholic religion in Iroland." As Catholics, then, do I say to all the t1ubjects of the empire, we are bound to resist this measure. This is our vindication-our full justification.
  But it  has u.lways been  odious to  me on another account.  If I were a Protestant  by  education and  from conviction, .as I  am a Catholio by education and  from  conviction,  I  declare to Goel I should equally oppose and resist the veto. Every enlightened nnd liberal Protestant ought to thank us for our opposition; for what enlightened man is there who does not see the frightful pro≠ gress of corrupt influence, where direct dominion would be re≠ sisted and overthrown 1 Corruption eats its silent way ; it de≠ vour6 the vitals of the state, whilst it allows the outward forms and shapes to retain the appearances of pristine strength and vigour. The padiament, more  than  thirty years  ago, declared that "the influence of the crown had increased, was increasing, and ought to be diminished." Alas l from that day to  this,  the evil has only accumulated ; no attempt at a remedy has been entertained.   Who  is the  honest  man that  could  put  his band to his heart, and say, that this influence has not Bwept away the most valuable part of that for which the English of old fqught, and bled, and died-constitutional  liberty 1  And  can  such 11,  man, thus convinced, allow the minister  to take, at  one sweep, all the influence of another Church 1 No man who values the safety of what remains to us of  the constitution,  can assent  to the gratuitous bestowing of more energy on tbe disease which undermines the constitution.
  There is, however, a. more pressing view of this danger, which arises when we behold the present state of Ireland. She has no 'Parliament of her own ; there is little of interest, and less of 1ympathy for the complaints of Ireland in  that  of  England. What grievance  hns the  imperial  parliament   redressed 1-what.
1"1noav enience P'I.B it remedit,d i  Let thosa who can, i 1form UII

DA'.:\'IEL o'coNL'IELL ESQ., x.P.
when bnve our prayers been listened to.    The 1JerJI remotmts, oj
fJl,((t par,lia.mem render, the aound  of our  C'Jmplaim, weaJ; and in≠
/fic nt.
  This is o. top10 which I would fa.in dwell upon ; but, 1.1as I to bewail our misfortunes in the language of truth may be crime ; J
and to speak historically of the practical evils that have fl.owed from the Union, would probably be punished by the very men who themselves loudly foretold the very calamities which we en≠ dure, and which they: sometimes  now inflict.     But  thi, very ap≠
pr sum of talldng the trttth aeruee only to prove ttow clismal would the prosptet of liberty be, if in every Catholic dwcese in Ireland there were an active partilan. of the minuter, aftd in every Catholic parwi, an active informer. Who is it that is ignorant of the present plan of patronage in Ireland t Why, have I not myself been the means of promoting many and many an adventurer 1
I have actually promoted more than one clergyman of the Es≠ tablished Church, and our ca\1118 has promoted many of them. To instance only one, there is the rectory of Clane, in the county of Kildare, which ought to be plaoed to my credit. A reverend parson, of the name of Thorpe, wrote q.s ill-constructed a pam≠ phlet as it is possible to imagine, to abuse me.  The  subject ought,  I  think, to  have enlivened   the man;  it was dull,  indeed
-but it was vinllent, and he was  immediately  rewarded  with the living of Clane. There is Elrington, the provost, too; how many a man of genius, taste, and learning in college was over≠ looked when he was promoted from his retirement  I  The public w astonished.  Who could account for this  promotion,  when there were so many in college and about college more suited to the dignityt But it wo.s recollected that he had written I\ pam≠ phlet or book against the Papists, and either  dediC11.ted or sent it to the Duke of Cumberland, who is one of the greatest patrons of the Esto.blished Church in Ireland, and Chancellor vf our University. Oh I a pamphlet against  Popery I  The provostshi∑ was little enough for him. But did any body ever read tho pamphlet through f If I had to sentence one of our worst eno-, mies, I should not desire a more malignant sentence than t.., condemn him to the reading, distinctly  and  without  omission, the entire of that pamphlet. Human  nature,  I  feat, could  not. bear it.
  Need I point ont  to you the regular  plan of county patronage in Ireland t Shall I trouble  you  with the well-known  details1 The Catholic bishop would become one of the appendages df the nci,unty patron; and, if he p,∞l\ould, ngainst all expecto.tion, pron:

, o 9")' "d by Google

8Ef.ECT  SPEECBL:8 OP

unwntcful or refractory, means would easily be found to get riJ 1,f him. If we allow the minister to appoint our bishopt it would follow that the minister would soon procure a law to authorize him to cashier the bishop, when necessary, as well a11 to make him. It would indeed follow, from the principle, that  the minister was to regulate the loyalty of the bishop.
  If he was to prevent a disloyal priest from being a bishop, sw∑ely he ought to have the power to turn off a man who had obtained a mitre by pretending to be loyal, and who afterwards proved disloyal. Every person who granted  the  first,  must admit  the  fair   and  obvious  necessity  of   the  second.   And if, in addition to all his other influence,  this  authority  were given to the minister and his dependents, where would the tor≠ rent of corruption be stayed, or where could resistance against
:iny future plan for the establishment of arbitrary power  be ho1,ed for 1
  I do, therefore, deprecate the veto, o.s an Irishman. As an ardent and enthusiastic lover of liberty, I detest it, and would oppose it at every peril. In both capacities, as Catholics nnd as Irishmen, we will ever resist it ; an i, placing on our banners the sacred words "religion" and "liberty," wage an eternal war 1Lgainst the open enemies and insidious foes of both. (Henr, hear, hear !-great applause.)
  The veto is defeated, and for ever ; but the question then arises, whether we shall ever be emancipated without it 1 I have been asked  this  question ;  my  reply has   been :  we  shall not,
 ,erhaps-probably we shall. But if we are not, we shall, at all 'vents, have preserved our religion and our honour. If we con≠ inue in an unjust inferiority of political station,  we shall, at least, remain sincere Catholics and faithful Irishmen. We may not be able "to  command  success;" but we will have done more
-" we will have deserved it."
  We have refuted every calumny; we have practically dis≠ proved every objection ; we have shown how powerless the PopE' is to alter, without the assent of our bishops, the  discipline  of the Church. And we now exhibit the determination, which we have always avowed, to resist any measures originating in Rome, of a political tendency or aspect. I know of no foreign prince whom, in temporal matters, the Catholics of Ireland would more decidediy resist, than the Pope ; and this whilst they respected
.and recognised his spiritual authority. (Hear, hear, hear.)
  But we will-wo must succeed. If there be an over-mling Providence in heaven-if there be justice or wisdom on oort]J,

Da.NIEL  o∑ooNNELL, El:!Q,,  ll.P.	25
we ought to expeot success. Our liberties were not lost in o.n:≠ disastrous battle. Our rights were  not  won  from  us  in  anJ field of fight. No; our ancestors  surrendered  upon  capitula, tion. A large army-many fortresses-a. country devoted ta them-foreign  assistance  at   hand ;  all  these our ancestors  surï
:-endered, on the faith of a solemn treaty, which stipulated, in return, for Ireland, "liberty of conscience." The treaty was ratified-it   passed  the   great seal  of  England ;  it  was observed
-yes, it was observed by English fidelity-just seven weeks. Our claim of contract has not been worn out by time. The obligation on England is not barred by a century of injustice and oppression.
  It has been attributed to the bigotry of the Catholics  of Brabant and Flanders, that they have rejected the new consti≠ tution of the Netherlands, because it favoured religious liberty. Absurd calumny I They were, it is known, attaohed to the government of Napoleon, who established universal liberty of conscience ; but there were many and many Irish colleges and convents in Brabant and Flanders. The inhabitants had been practically informed of the breach of faith-of the violation of i;olemn treaty by the first Prince of Ora.hge who reigned over Catholic Ireland. What w11s so natural as that they should entertain fears lest a breach of faith, a violation of treaty should
signalize the first prince of that same House of Orange that was to reign over Catholic Brabant.
  We are not, I repeat it, overthrown in  battle. Our  oppres≠ sion originated in injustice. It has not been justified by any subsequent crime or delinquency on our  parts. For a century and a half of sufferings, we have exhibited a fidelity unaltered and unalterable. Our allegiance to the state has been equalled only by our attachment  to  the  faith of  our  fathers. But  we now present the extraordinary spectacle of men at one and the same time the reproach of the justice, and th!l refuge and suc≠ cour in danger, of the British empire. Let the hardiest of our opponents say what that empire would now be but for the Ca≠ tholics of Ireland.
  Thus do the Catholics urge their claims. They complain of original injustice ; they i ist on present merits ; they require
\he a.id of, and they place their emancipation on, the great prin≠ Jiple of the universal right of liberty of  conscience;  they oa.ll on  Eng d  to behold  a  prtlar.y  prf!moted  from "their  auperior
JMrits, and rentkring illu,triou, e;,,e;.. superior station by the un≠
obtrusive but continued ezertion of all  tM  l.ahours and all the 11i1∑ï

26	SELECT SPEECHES OP
tuea tkat could ornament and J,ignify epilcopacy. (Great and long-oc,ntinued applause.)
  They call on England to behold a priesthood having no other motives but their sense of religion ; aee'/cing no ot/in reward but
!h,e approbation of their own comciencea; learned, pioiu, and h,u,rr.,. l,le ,∑ always active in the discharge of their duties ; teaching 1.' 'll'llfJ, comforting the old, imtTUCti'llfJ the ignorant, reatraining the
´ciotu, encouragi'llfJ the good, dilcounten.ancing and terrif!li,,g the criminal--1,i,iting the lwwl of poverty, aoothi11fJ the pa'llfJB <'f aid∑- 1'ffl and of 601Tow, ,Jwwing the path to heatJffl and thnnaelves ltad≠ ing the way. (Repeated bursts of applause.)
  They call on England to behold a people /ait/iful even und.,,.,. persecutwr,,-grateful for s piUance of jwti.ce-cheer/ul m1der 01,∑ preaaive ta:ration-/ormw# in every battle, and giving an  earnest of their allegiance and attachment to a government  which  they could  love1     by  their attachment  to  the religion  which  they revere
-proving,  by their exclusion and  sufferings, their practical  reve≠
rence for the obligation of an oath : and by their anxiety to be ndmitted into the full enjoyment of the constitution, how powcr≠ fullytheyappreciate the enjoyment of civil liberty. -Such a people as this-distinguishingat one and the same time spiritual autho≠ rity, which is not of this world, from temporal power, which be\ongs to it-giving to GoD tha things which are Goo's, but preserving to Ciesa.r the things which are Caisar's-such a nation as this, prelates, priests and people, demand, with manly firmness, but with decent respect, their birthright-LIBERTY, their honest earning : that which they ma.inta.in with their money, and sw,tain wit::i their blood-the CoNITITUTION,
  Such are the persons who require emancipation ; such is the nature of their claim. Shall I be told, then, by interested bigotry, that the people of England cannot, in conscience, grant our de≠ mands 1 Conscience, indeed I Oh, let the English conscience consult justice, and we shall soon be free. But the objection i futile and ridicul!)us.	Why, there are now upwards offive hun≠ dred different sects in England, and our demands favour every one, except the Established Church ; for all we ask is liberty and conscience. We do not ask-we would not take peculiar privi≠ leges or individual advantages ; we ask that religion should  be left between man and his Creator, and that conscience should be free.
  Let me, however, read for you the extract of English conscienct ILlld liberality, where Ireland is unconcerned. The other day the Ilritish forces conquered the King of Candy A treaty wa!l, ou

O.lXIEL O'CONNELL, ESQ., M.P,	27
the 2nd of March last∑, signed between the Bl'itiRh officers, the represontatives of our King, on the one part, and the princip1l Candians, on the other. It is the charter by which the sovereigntJ or the state is vested in the crown ; it has been accepted and con≠ finned by the Prince Regent, and is now law in the island of Ceylon. The fifth article of this treaty is in these words:-
  "The religion of BooDRO, which is professed by the chiefs and by the inhabitrmt of these provinces, IS DECLARED INVIOLABLE, and its rites, ministers, and places of worship nre to be ?.UINTAINED AND PROTECTED."
  There are inviolability, maintenance, and protection, for th) statA religion of Bpodhoo, and English conscience is not shocked. Here is the Mirth Avater, or incarnation of  Vishnon,  protected by the British government, maintained in all its at ributes, and declared inviolable; we shall have learned dissertations,  printed at the British expense, showing his  powers  and  glory ;  prov≠ ing him to be the Godanna of one district, and the Fohi of the Chinese ; and perhaps a controversy  may arise  again,  whether he be n-0t the identical Woden whom one class of the mon!!rel
ancestry  of England  worshipped.	.
  Mark, too, that there is here no veto--no nomination by the ï crown talked of. The emancipation of the Candians is full and unqualified : and then  we are  told  that  conscience  will  prevent the full and unqualified emancipation of Catholic and unchriotian lrishmen.
Believe me, however, that your emancipation is not remote or
uncertain. The history of the world is not over. A fortnight might place an Alexander on the throne of Napoleon: and as his power is already overwhelming, I rejoice that he is of the Greek Church, lest we should be put on our securities as to him. No; the history of the world is not over. It is true that legitimacy and autocracy, and all other invasions on popular rights and free choice, are for a  season  triumphant, The title of deliverer has become synonymous with a partitioner and plunderer.	Royal declarations are only public demonstrations of the pretences which cover purposes of guile of another descrip-
tion.	∑
 . But the spirit, the genius of liberty  survives. M:an  cannot, with the knowledge he has acquired, and the exnmples he be≠ holds, continue in slavery. The people cannot, even in despotio states, be despised ; but in a  free state,  like  that of  England, fivo millions oaouot continue in thraldom. Who does not pe,∑≠ oeive how fast our multitudes increase-how rapidly our streng h

SELECT  SPEECIIES 0)'

ri:i:muulate.31 Saa within th9 la.st twenty yaJ.ril ho∑,v  WJ  b:i.'l"e risen from a horde of helots to a nation. Even the union, which destroyed our country,  increased  our  importance  and  our  num≠ bers.    England  wants  us, and  may easily gain  us.    Let  her  act  " as she has done by tho Ca.ndia.ns;  let  her  leave  inviolate  the religion which the  chiefs and  the  people of  Ireland possoss ;  and we will, in return, support  her  by  our  unbroken  strength,  and sustain her with our young blood,  in  every  distress and  through every peril I	∑
Hr. O'Connell ut down eh-od bymoot rapturou applauae.
  On Wedneaday, the 8th of September, Hr. O"Connell mo-.ed-t a muetlng of the "('atlloHe .Auocladtm, u It wu called-for a committee of - to go ro1111d the different 1,arllhea to collect au∑ ocrlptlona towards defrar!lltl the ex	of the deputation about to prOC86d to Rome on the " ,ecnrltlea"' question.
  Mr. O'Connell hlmael( with He1Bra. Mahon, ll'Donnell, Enna,and Lyona, were appointo∑ to draw up a remonatrance to his Hollneaa the Pope.
  Tbe clerlclll deputation conalated of Rb Grace the HOit Re-.. Dr. Murray, the Rlg!1t R8\" Dr. Murphy Oate Blahop of Cork), and Arcbdeacon Blake, the Ian named being  now  tho much reapected and belo-.ed Blahop of Dromore.
  On the 14th September appeared a letter from the Rlgbt Re-.. Dr. MilDer (In an,..-,.,. t,, Mr. O"Connell'a allusions to him In a lljl88Ch we h&-.e pven aome pagee back), repea:ln1: Ida dlaclalmera of vetolatlcal lnclluatlonL	∑
The following remouatrance to the Pope wu drawn np br Kr. O'Connell a d adopted b1
Urn Catholic bo<ly :-
"TO HIS HOLINESS POPE PIUS VII.
"THE HUMBLE ADDR AND RUONSTRANOE O.P Tlltl ROllAY
OATROLICS O.P  IREL.L'ffi.
  " MOST HoLY F.I.TRER-We, the Roman Catholic people of Ireland,  most  humbly  approach  your  Holiness,  imploring  f'-'r five millions of faithful childr1:,n, the apostolical benediction.
  " We desire, Moat Holy Father, to alldress your. Holiness in respectful and unreserved  terms ;  that  so  your Holiness  may be perfectly informed of our foars, our desires, and our deter≠ minations.
"We deem it unnecessary, Most Holy Father, to remind thP
 overeign Pontiff of our Church, of our peculiar claims to his protection and support ; for we cannot, for a moment, imagine that your Holiness is unmindful of the constancy and devotion manifested towards the Holy See by the Roman Catholios of Ireland, in despite of the most sanguinary and unrelenting per≠ secution that ever aggrieved a Christian people.
  "∑we cannot, however, abstain from reminding  our  Most Holy Father, that although the persecution which we and om f\ncestors endured, was notoriously and avowedly inflicted upon

DA.'ilEL  O'COYYELL,   ES ., H.P.	29
-us, on account of our adherence to, and connexion with, th'3∑ Holy See ; nevertheless, the Roman Catholics of Ireland never solicited the predecessors of your  Holiness,  att,any  period ot  that persecution, to alter, in the slightest degree, that connexion,
:,r make any modification of the existing discipline of our holy Church, to obt.a.in for the  Roman  Catholics  of  Ireland,  thG repeal or mitigation of those cmel laws which proscribed them. "With sentiments of most &mcere sorrow, we have  heard that, notwithstanding the  uniform  manifestations of our  &j.,iri≠ tual attachment  to  the  Holy  See,  it  has  pleased  your Holiness to fu.vour a measure which would enable  a Protestant  govern≠ ment to control the  appointment  of  our  prelates ; against  which the Catholic voice  of  Ireland  has  protested,  aud  ever will  pro≠ test  with one accord.	No spirit grounds are alleged for the proposed alteration in our ecclesiastical system ; it is not pre≠ tended that it would advance the  interests  of  religion, or  i:n≠ prove the morality of the Catholic people of Ireland ; on the contrary, it is proposed in opposition to the well known  and declared opinions of our spiritual guides, and is offered as au
exchange or barter for some temporal aid or concession ; it therefore becomes our duty, as Catholics and as subjects, to  state, in most explicit terms, our sentiments upon it.
  " It is considered right to assure your Holiness, in the first instance, that although the penal laws, which were  framed  for the oppression of the Catholics of Ireland, have been consider≠ ably relaxed during the reign of our present most gracious so≠ vereign ; nevertheless, the hostility to our holy religion con≠ tinues to exist in full force; and every artifice is practised, and avery inducement held out, to seduce  the Irish  Catholic  from the practice and  profession  of  his religion. Rewards are  given to every Catholic clergyman who apostatizes trom his faith ; public schools and hospitals are  maintained,  at  great  expense, in which hostility to the creed and character of  Roman  Catho≠ lics constitutes the first principle of instruction ; commissioners nre appointed to prevent Catholic institutions receiving any benefit from the donations of pious persons; societies aro es≠ tablished, under the favour of our rulers, for proselytizing the Catholic poor; and bribes offered and given to Catholic parents, for the purchase of  their  chililren's  faith;  at  the  sacne  ime, that every effort of bribery and corruption is exerted  to  influ. ence Roman Catholic schoolmasters to seduce the Roman Cathr.1- lic children entrusted to their care, from an attachment to tht,ir crncrl. Every member of the legislature, every min.ist1>r of the

SELECT 8PEECIIE8 OF

gvv/Jrument, every judge. of the land, every superior navnl, mili≠ tary, or civil officer, and almost every individual in official stn.≠ tion, is obliged to swear, and has actually sworn, in the following words, viz. :-' I do solemnly and sincerely, in the presence of God, profess, testify, and declare, that I do believe, that in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, there is not any transubstan≠ tiation of the elements of bread and wine into the  body  and blood of  Christ, at   or  after  the  consecration   thereof,   by any
1ierson whatsoever ; and that the invocation or adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any other saint, and the Sacrifice ot' the  Mass, as they are now used in the Chnrch of  J,fome, are superstitiouM
and idolatrous ; and I do solemnly, in tho presence of God, profess, testify, and declare, that I do make this declaration, ancl every part thereof, in the plain and ordinary sense of the words read unto me, as they are commonly understood by English Protestants, without a1,y evasion, equivocation, or mental reser≠ vation whatsoever, and without any dispensation already granted me for this purpose, by the Pope, or 11,ny authority or person whatsoever, or without any hope of any such dispensation from any person or authority whatsoever, or without thinking that  I am or can be acquitted before God or man, or absolved of this declaration, or any part thereof, although the Pope, or any other person or persons, or power whatsoever, should dispense with or annul the same, or declare that it wns null or void fron1 the beginning.'	.
"It is to persons who have taken these offensive oaths of hos≠
tility against our holy religion, that we are now required, Most Holy Father to confide the selection and appointment of the prelates of our Church ; and thus, t.he efforts of persecution having been found unsuccessful, it is now sought to accomplish, by intrigue, the destruction of that Church, whose pre-eminent perfection has excited the jealousy and the hatred of our reliï gious opponents.
  "We cannot suffer ourselves to suppose that your Holiness would knowingly sanction so pernicious a measure ; for, it is our decided conviction, that any such concession to our Pro≠ testant Prince, or to his Protestant ministers, of a right to in≠ terfere, directly or indirectly, in the appointment of our prelates,
∑ would inevitably destroy the Catholic religion in  Ireland.  Its first consequence would be, a general indignant revolt  against the framers or favourers of the detested system, without  regard to rank or station ; and it s not difficult to imagine that so la≠ mentable a breach would lead t.o such a state of distrust :1L1'1

DANIEL o'oONNELL, ESQ., lll.P.

di satisfaction, as might end in the dissolution of that confiden≠ tial connexion, in spiritual concerns, which at present so hap≠ pily subsists between the Holy See and the Roman Catholics of Ireland. The prelates and priesthood would be shunned and despised ; the altars and confessionals would be deserted ;  a state of irreligion and immorality would succeed in the place of the religious and moral conduct which at present distinguishes the people of Ireland ; public disorders and private misfortunes would follow, and our neglected Church would become an easy prey to those who now labour for the extirpation of the Roman Catholic faith from this nation.
  "We desire to assure your Holiness that the Roman Catholic hity of Ireland feel, towards their prelates and their priests, the most enthusiastic esteem and attachment; they look up to them not merely as spiritual guides, but also as confidential friends and faithful advisers. The trials of  persecution  created a sys≠ tem of mutual affection and support, which enabled each to bear up against the severities of sanguinary laws. These  mutual servi.ces are not forgotten ; the sentiments which they generated rerna.in unchanged ; and, therefore, we never can consent that our pure and pious  heirarchy  should  be contaminated by such a connexion, as must endanger their just irrfluence, and render them objects of dislik11 and distrust among their faithful flocks. "These are some of the results expected by the favourers of lhe proposed measure, to follow its enactment ; but there are other objects also in their contemplation. They seek, and ar≠ dently desire, to destroy the spiritual authority of the Holy See in this country ; and we are confident that their expectations would be ultimately fulfilled,. if they could establish the desired revolution in our ecclesiastical system; because experience has taught us, that wherever any interfereµce  of  the ministers of the British crown has been allowed, they have ultimately suc≠
ceeded in obtaining absolute and exclusive control.
  '' Your Holiness must be sensible of the injustice of the im≠ putations directed against our venerable hierarchy, by those persons who exprefls a desire to provide further securities for their peacc!tble and loyal conduct. 'fheir correspondence with t.he Holy 8ee is, of course, open to  the inspection of your Holi≠
,:eRs ;  und  we entertain  no  doubt  but  they  may, with perfect
,,!fety to their political chamcters,  challenge the most scrutiniz≠
∑ and jealous reference  to  the  l'Ommunications , hich consti≠ t nte that correspondence. Again, their conduct at home is r,atched with more  than com1J1011 vigilance ; the  most trilling

32	SELEOT SPBECBES o:,
instance of disaffection would be gladly exposed, and yet their characters not only remain unimpeached, but the highest offi≠ cers of the crown  resident in  this island  have  borne testimony to their loyalty, and to their laudable exercise of that influence which their station and conduct had obtained for  them,  over their respective flocks. The ministers of the crown are already invested with ample powers to correct any subject or stranger who may disobey the laws ; and no instance  has  occurred  in this country, of any man, of any station, having esCl!ped pun≠ ishment, in consequence of the insufficiency of the existing laws to provide for his correction.
  " Neither should it be forgotten that  our venerable  prelates are bound, by most solemn oaths, to observe strictly loyal and peaceable conduct ; of which oaths we annex copies hereunto, and humbly submit them to the inspection 1Lnd consideration of your Holiness. And we are, therefore, confident that this de≠ mand for further securities is not founded upon any apprehen≠ ion of the existence of a. neceBSity for them; but ïthat it hu.d originated solely from a desire to enable the  enemies of  our holy religion, by the admiBBion of such interference and en≠ crou.chments, to accomplish the destruction of a Church which they have so long ineffectually assailed.
  " We feel that we should be wanting in the practfce of that candour, which it is our pride to profess, were we not further to inform your HolineBB that we have ever considered our claims for political emancipation to be founded upon principles of civil policy. We seek to obtain from our government nothing more thnn the restoration of temporal rights ; and must, most  hum≠ bly, but most firmly, protest against the interference of your HolineBB, or any other foreign prelate, state, or potentate, in tLe control of our temporal conduct, or in the arrangement of our political concerns.
  " We, therefore, deem it unneceBSary, Most Holy Father, to state to your Holiness the manifold objections of a political nature which we feel towards the proposed measure. We hav.. confined ourselves, in this memorial, to the recapitulation oi objections, founded upon .spiritual considerations ; because, Ill! on the one hand we refuse to suJmit our religious concerns  to the control of our temporal chief; so, on the other hand, we cannot admit any right, on the part of the Holy See, to inves≠ tigate our politic.al principles, or to direct our political conduct; it being our farnest desire and fixed determination  to  conform, at all timP.s. and un!ler 9Jl circw:nstances, to the injunctions of

DANIEL O'CONNELL, ESQ., ll.P.	3't
that Mcrod ordinance ,vhich teaches us to distinguish bchm..:u. spiritual and temporal authority, giving unto Cmsar those things whioh belong to Cmsar, ll::..! !.!.uto God those things whioh belong to God.
  "Thus, then, Moat Holy Father, it appe:i.rs-while thin ob≠ noxious measure is opposed by every  orcler of our  hierarchy, that we, fur whose relief it purports to provide, feel equa ly ardent and determined in our resistance to it ; solemnly de≠ claring, as we now do, that we would prefer the perpetuation of our present degraded state in  the  empire,  to  any  suoh  barter, 01∑ exchange, or compromise of our religious fidelity and perseï verance.
  '' We, therefore, implore your Holiness not to sanction a mea.- ï sure so obnoxious to the JJlOSt faithful and disinterestedly ,∑at≠ baohed  portion of  the universal fl.ook.   Our hostility is founded on experience  and  observation ;  whereas,  the  remote  situation of your Holiness  renders it  necessary  that the Holy See should rely upon the representations of others, who may have been interested in the praatice of delusion or deceit ; for the Roman Catholics of Ireland never oan  believe,  that  their revered  pon≠ tiff, who had endured  so  much of  suffering  in maintenance  of his spiritual station, would, knowingly and intentionally, invade
or oppress the conscientious feelings of a Catholic people, who had endured nearly three centuries of persecution, in conse- 11nence of thl)ir devotion to the same religious system.
  " If this Olll' determination be e1Toneotis, we should regret that we and our ancestors had not long since discovered  tho error ; as the Catholics of Ireland oould, by making such sacri≠ fices, have already obtained relief from the penal code which oppressed them. But, we do not lament om∑ perseverance ; ∑ on the contrary, we are confirmed in our conviction, that a con≠ scientious adherence to the same course will ultimately obtain the approval of the Holy See, and ensure the  admiration  of eve1∑y faithful member of the Christian Church.
  "If it shall please our temporal rulers to impose this obnox≠ ious regulation upon us, we must bow down our  heads before the ordinan-ce of the All-Seeing Providence; and, humbly con≠ fiding in his merciful protection, meet this new trial with the same religious spirit as has enabled us to survive every similar persecuting provisions.  Grievously, indeed,  would wo  lament, if our enemies should succeed in alienating the mind of your∑ Holiness from so  many millions  of  faithful  childrel'l.  Should it, howeyer, unl).appily 11,ppear that the influence of our oppoï
VO	U	0

SELECT   SPEECHES or

'1,ents is more powerful than the prayers of such a people, we would still proceed in the course which practice and  persecu≠ tion ha-.e tried o.nd proved.
  "We will not, however, anticipate so cru.amitous and so por≠ entous a determination on the part of your Holiness ; we will rather cherish our accustomed confidence in the Holy See, and resting on t1e benign Providence of the Divine Founder of our faith, we will look forward to such a determination on the pl\l"t of your Holiness, as will allay our religious anxieties; preserve, undisturbed, the peace of a Churo_h enthusiastically devoted to its spiritual chief; and thereby  perpetuate,  by  indissoluble bonds,  the  spiritual  connexion  which  has  been so  long main≠
tained  between  the  See of  Rome  and the  Roman Catholics ot
Ireland.
  " For these purposes, and with these views, we lay this our humble address and remonstrance at the foet of your Holiness, praying a favourable consideration; and again imploring the apostolical benediction.
" T.EJOMAB EBKONDE, Chairmnn.
"EDWARD HAY, Secretary.
  " I certify that the above address and remonstrance was framed by the Association of the Roman Catholics of Ireland, pursuant to the directions of the aggregate meeting, held on Tuesday, the 29th day of August last.
"N1cuoLAs MAuoN,
"Chairman of the Aesociation.
"Dublin, September 16th, 1815."
  Tbs foregclng address waa duly forwarded to Rome; bot aftera period of -reutlouo dolay1 and inconclualve negoc!atlona, the fact came to be known that It would not be received ihere officially; as that would be taken to be a formal recognition of the right ot lay lnter≠ ierenco in a matter held by many anthorltlea to be exclllll-rely of an ecclealastlcal nature.
  There ls nothing that need delay na In the record& of the popular otruggle during the remainder of 1816, or the early pen of the oncceedlng year.
  In January, Ind Gf that year,  the  "aecedera,"  ao the  l<Ji-dilant  aristocratic  party  ol ths Cathollca wero genera!ly designated, showed aome activity  In  giving  trouble;  and  In that and the following month, the strange and dlocouraging 1pectacle WIii mtre than once rïreaented to the lrllh public, of two dWincl meetings of C"thollca In the metropolis ; the aocedero at Lord Trlmleoton's hollle; ar.d the "Catholic Association," at  Fltzpatrick"s.  in Capel street; the tint reaolfl111 to entrnat their  "  111-IUUrlttaï petition  to llr. Grattan In the C:ommon1; the other eqaally reeolvlng to entruat their "tfflCOJ!dilional e,nancipotioftï" J',"tltlon to Sir H. Parne!L Both  choee  the  111111e peroon in the  Lvrda≠ l-0rd Donoughmorc-t."l preoont their reapectl-re petltlon1 In the upper hoase.
On T:le9d&y, 6th lllarcb, 1816. an &gif8gllte meeting of the Cathollca took place In tht
rrer,,,n Ch=h otSt.∑reresa, Clflrendon-otreet. The following reoolntlons pasoed.
  "R::r,,io:i,n:.:.ï-∑Tllat the Most Rev. and Right Rev. the Catholic prcl.\OOS of Ireland, at a meeting held by them in the city of Dublin,

DANIEL O'CONNELL, ESQ., 1'!.r,

CM the 23rd and 24th of August, 1815, did unanimously enter into 11
resolution in the following words :-
  "ïThat i, isour decided and conscientious conviction that any p'>wer granted  to the  go,-ernment  of  Great  Britaiu,  of  interfering, directlJ or indirectly, in the appointment of Bishops for the Roman Catholic Church in Ireland, must essentially injure, and may eventually subver the Roman Catholic religion in this eountry.'
  "RESOLV.KD-Tlla.t with the conviction deeply and unaltera.bly im≠ pressed upon our minds or the purity and sincerity of t,he venerated prelates who adopted the foregoing re olution, and of  the  plain truth nnd certainty of the conclusion which they have thus a.nnounced, we shoula consider ourselves as betra.ying the dearest interests of out religion, and of our country, did we not most unequilïocally  declare, that we will, AT ALL TIMES, AND tTNDEit ALL CIRCUMSTANCES, depre≠ cnte and oppose, by every means that the laws ht.ve left u , any such interference as the Catholic prelates and peorle have so often and st, emphatically condemned.
  " RESOLVED-That the sole pursuit of the Catholic people of Ire≠ land being liberty-civil QS well as religious-we should deem ourselves base and degraded, were we to purchase any advantages for ourselves, by consenting to any arrangement, which, by iucreRSing the undue in≠ fluence of his majesty's ministers, must injure the civil liberty of our fe1low-s11bjects, of every religious denomination.
  "RESOLVED-That we re-adopt the resolution of the 13th March, 1806, that the holdings of meetings at any priva.te house, for the gene≠ ral concerns of the Catholic body, is unfavourable to the freedom of discussion, and inadequate to the collection of public sentiment.
  " That any meeting convened for the consideration or  Catholie nff'airs, and involving the interests of the body nt large, brought  about by private invitation. and partial selection, muat be iujuriou.. to the iutere:-ta of tbe Catholics of Ireland."
  Tll.e∞Cbalrman opened the proceedings by lamenting the conduct of the aeceders, and condemning the vetolatlcal tendency of the petition which emanated from them. He expressed a !1ope that the:r would see the error or their waya, and that the dlvlllon among tho Catholics beln; healed, all would once more unite their eft'orta In the cause. He alv. recommcndo4 lmmedll!te endeavours to conciliate the Protettanta.
  MR. C'CoNNELL said that he was prep(J,re<i, to <lo every thi11,g for eoncili<.1tio,;i, ezcept surrendering the venerable reli.gion of r.is fati.erB and of M,3 c:ountry.
  It r-T nothiswish to attack the private feelings of the sece≠ dem, nor his desire to say a.nything of them as individuals. But ho would doLounoo tr.em cu a 'body, and would prove them the eue if)B of thei!' roligion, their country, and their God !
  He t!ie:i	?.everal. resolutions of the Catholic Board, a.nd of va!ioll.8 nggrogi.te Catholic meetings, at which the Earl of fingol and several others of the " aeceders" hA.d presided and a.tteoded-resolution.'l eitrongly declnring their hostility to the

S6	SELECT BPBBOilES OF
measure or the veto. He drew attention to one in partfoulai-,
.noved by Lord Killeen, and seoonded by Lord Trimleston (then Mr. Barnewall), which declared that they could not offer, in sin≠ cerity, a.1y species whatsoever of "aeeurity," nor admit any arrangement or interference of the crown in matters  touching their religion, such interference  being,  in  their opinions,  only an exchaucre of one species of servitude for another.
  Yet (said he), these noble lords now tender the veto to tho legislature !
  What is the meaning or interpretation to be put upon this resolution, other than that given by the plain and obvious sig≠ nification of the words1 Were these noble lords then sincere, or are they sincere  now, Do they mean to gladden the hea of our enemies and persecutors, by fostering, in their shameful inconsistency, the belief that there is mental reservation in the minds of Catholics I	∑
  So far a.o to  the  people-but  how do they stand with  reg:ml to the prelates 1
  The prelates have declared, that any interference  of  tho Crown must injure, and might subvert their religion.  This  is their solemn and emphatic declaration. And now the seoeders presume to assert that our venerated prelates are insincere ! and that, in the name of the HoLT GHOB'r, they have published A FALSEHOOD to the world 11 !
  I restrain my feelings, my natural feelings at, this most daring presumption of theirs, and I limit myself to the to.me and measured phrase that they, these seceders, are thus clearly acting inconsistently with the declaration of the hierarchy, and what i:1
)f infinitely less importance, with their own conduct !
I oppose the measures of the seoeders, because they are preg≠
) nant with the worst mischief. I would wish to hear any man explain their conduct, and justify, if it can be justified, the dis≠ g1-acefnl and slavish sentiment which they have avowed.
  The 9Peaker then proceeded to comment, In conslderaUe detail, upon all the rtrcum≠ stances connected with the getting up of the petition of the .. ceding J>1lrt.y, and npon variou.o other matters having relation to the subject of hla prccedinr obaervaUons.
Before concluding, be further took occasion to withdraw, with tnani∑ term, of respect
∑and compliment, all the expru,iom which bad fallen fl-om him at a run,ie,ï meeting, with reference to the Right ReY. Dr. Milner, dcch1,ins thst he bad 1lnce le med that 111, lordï ship was otesdily adverse to tho Yeto, and bad illtely oppooed It at the Conrt of Rome, with all his well-known energy and ability.
The year 1816 ciosed, without any fGrmal  condemnation   of  the v,to by tho head of !!lo
C,tholfc church, and  indeed, with not  a few indicatloni  of"   dloposltion  o.t  the  conn ot
l!ome, t11 treat foe proposition with more t-:.!el'!.nt..:c than had been drMm of.  The  fri,nd∑ tL.:r a: ïLm1111;:,rtï - c J.::n;;lu.nd wero t.hen h ld te be m,J.tters of too.eroat valua. nc;t to!.ava

DANIEL o'co.NNELL, ESQ., M.P.	37
every r.oaalble effort and 11&crlllce made to  retain  them.  J.lke  the  high  Irregular  waves or tbe at111, prev&llln11 alter the tempest baa snblllded, the surface or European society yet up. llos\"ed ominously l\nd wildly u}l<)n every side, distracting th<, timid mine! with a Lhcusancl feurs an<l gloomy lm1111lnlngs, and Impelling It to any expedient that gave a chance of tem. pora,'1 saMy.
  At  home, the  Yolce∑  oi  Ireland hnd, Indeed, spoken out  by the  mouths of  the  majority of her hierarchy, 11nd the entire or the second order of clergy, with the unanlmou., concLrï rence or the people. So far the queatlon might have been considered closed 1'nd deter-. mined. But the resolves of a natlon,:.ruled and legislated  for  by stmngera, baï1e  theh strength andeffect only In the. momentary strength and concentration of the popular mind , and any of the tbouaand inlluences that can be brought  to  bear on the  latter forthe pur pose or division and distraction, will, If succea.,ful, neutralize and destroy the value of  what bu been prevloualy accompll1hed.
 And there were sadly depreulng cauaes at work In Ireland ! The miserable policy of England (policy, alaa I little departed from to this present hour) had longbeforo established the conviction that any conceulon, any graoe from her, WM only to be won under  the pressnre of adverse ctrcumlt&ooe& Hope of any spontaneons Justice, or free-∑ïill "bm<ï on her part, there was none. Tile vicissitudes of the, ..n ulnary war, which hrul
been foï so many y1111rs waging, appeared to offer the only substantial chance for a real nllevlatlon of  Irish mlaerle.s, a real attention to Irish claim., So long, then, 118 war exlsteu, 10 long there appe.ared some chance for Ireland.
  The Irl1h were not to blame for tbla ïtate of thingï. It was not their fault that the Interests and mutual feelings of two Islands, neighbouring each other, forming parts of the same empire, and apparently de.dgned by nature to be In friendly alliance, were In anta≠ gooiam. Suppllcationa without nlllDber, couched lo the mo,t pllclllc, most calmly re&!On≠ lng, most concll!ato1'1 IAnl(UBge, bad gone forth from them, to the controllero of their des≠ tinies In England. The answers had been In Insulting wordï of refusal, and acta of fl11 ttlonï tyranny,   Little wonder  then, that Englll.nd's difficulties should have  been lookc<l  to  wilh a gloomy hope, ∑
  But the Irish looked for nothing more than the Inevitable concessions of Just claims by England In her dl1llculty. In the soWld heart of the nation there was no desire for French nlllance.  France, still reeking with the lllthy mire of her  Infidelity, and darkly crlmsone<l
-.,1th the stale and unexplated blood of her revolutionary massacres, was not the compa≠ nion to whom enfranchised Ireland would have held out the hand.  Ueliglon and morallly
-the only sure groundwork for ïoclal order and national prosperity- mu.st have sulforc<.I
from the connexion and therefore, Ireland would have none of It-utterly abhorre<l it even In Idea!
  Where the Catholic party hoped, the Orange party feared amrii-embled. They were, al conrse, equally aware of the unfailing coincidence of English difficulty and concession. and bad alternated between extravagant Jot and extravagant trepidation, according as the arm1 or the allle.s, or those or the French emperor, had prospered In the progre.ss of the ttruggle.  Thelrerultatlon at Napoleon's fall, In 1814, had been violent, but IIJ)Oedlly dashed
'Ind reversed by his 1ndden astounding recovery of his throne and power, In the begin11Ing
o:the   succeeding ye.ar.    Where they exulte.d, the Catholics grieved;  where they deïpo11deJ
the Catholics began to hope.
  At length the !Ina! reversal eame to the hopes of the Catholics, that England might bE compelled by disaster at length to listen to tho voice of Justice, and concede thelr rights. Waterloo was Caught, Napoleon a prisoner, ∑,,.nee subdued, and the alllanco most blasphel mously styled "Holy !" was let loose opon clvlllzatton, and mankind's rights, to work Its devilish wllL England w<11 In her palmiest hour of trilllDph, and, as a necessary conse≠ qnenee, her heart was lW'der than ever towards poor Ireland.
TI,e delight and trllllDph of the Irish Orangemen may be Imagined, bat could scarcelv
oo described In word& All danger seemed ayer-all hope, all chance ohut to the Catholk Toryl1m-eruel, ïtrong,he.arted,Insolent Torylsm,  was  rampant, not only in tboïe com1t1∑1eo, l ut.&ll over pro.Irate Enror,e. Their asc nclimcy they lïilievcll to 11,.,.e got a ne1v le.uo

5F.J.EC'l'  SPEECHES  O l"

,, !t.uie m,st 1lkt:y for another centnry-filll llceneeto plunder, Gppresa a::d tram.,lc u1,01:. t.t.cir unb&l!lïY follow-Chrlatl&na, Md fellowïeountl'11Jlen.
  Aa their Ml&lG went up, that of the Catholie,i, of COW"N, went down-clown to the .-ery i:round.   Spirit, hope, llfe---&ll aeemed qnenched-FH  on fol'  ..,.lmOJ>i  Uie 10  latoly
-.ell organised nd energetic Cathollc body.
  Mr. O'Conntll always spoke ofthla period u-of t.H-b'y!JllofldleYeDt1ulllfe' Jly no kind of means, by no manner of exertion, and be 4'd look &bua& for means, and fltd use a tbuuaand exertlona, could he uowoe Uie CaU.Ollel to &CUoo, or 9'f8II to a defemln, v,sitlon. J,'or more than two yean a moral lethariY, a falnt-hNned and bepe1- apathy ilï1ng over the country, and, with the exc.ptlon of lumNII, ...,..,any onewu la the Aeld for Ireland.	∑	∑
  To such an extent did thla help!- 1.114 ln11etMty pre1'1111, that even tile rent 11{ the noms ln Cape\. street, tenanted by the Catholics  for  the  P"'- t'1lelr meetings, ,.u  unpaid, untll llr. O'Connell put hla band ln hla own pocket ll)r tlMI pcl1'JION, Resljpllng them a., too expensive, he took11DU11ler rooma ln Crow-.et,M11Uor II lcmg Ullle diaebarge4 all expenseï connected trtib them, and with 1111 Sb&& l'tllllaiDed of tlMI "worlliag" of l.l!e Catholic cau.c.	∑
  During this period of depreNlon, had the fell ...,...eltlMI Brttllb mh:dater agalnl& the Independence of the Cathollc chllffh In Ireland,1-1 actively pushed, there la much ,_
,on to belleve they would have been IIUCClllllfld. Bllt where hlllllllll help failed, Divine l'rov!dence lnterpoaed to save n& In tlMI Jugb-tlmbed prliMofherext.raonlillary111eceeaea England, u lt were, forgot Ireland. an1 the IICheruee for e´rupttna the Jrllh llll:ld nnd bcart, which had ,eemed 10 Important, while II cbanee remalne4 of  forelgll  Interference. Or, If lhe remombered these matters, the 14& appeared rldlc1llou flt &Olnl to aoy trouble to delude and ?e duce a people abaolutely, llnd u Ille thought llopelealy aod lnemedi&bly beneath her feet.
The "veto" WuS therefore abandoned-abandoned at the mom?m when the ch111aea of
forcing It on Ireland were stron11est,-11bandoned when the Cathollelam for whMï our tathen snft'ered and dled, seemed 'O&at human help, and "the ptea of bell'' for a mumeiu icemed about tou p1-eTall."
Why lhonld we then despond In this our pre:ient erlllla t>f Catholldnn?
  We have not allude<\ to Mr. O'Connell"ï profcaalonal career u 7et 'o Ulla vo,nme, u no reports, except of  the  moat meagre  and scanty deacrlptloo, are to be foud uf Illa bar
ïpceches, during the lntervoJ It embrace& Blï advance In the profeulon wu  gruat, and Ms Income, term nfter term, and circuit after cln:nlt, greatly loereulni, WW. 1, rapidity entirely unprecedented. Unfortunately, however, for thla work, the reporta of many and many a powerful la,v argument, and many an etrect!Ye addreu to Juries, aro 10 meap-e nn<l  Imperfect, that It would be only a wute of the  reader' ? time to gho them tn tho pre≠
ïent collectlon.   Such of  hla forensic  etrorta,  however,  u   have been recordod wltli any
∑-ïlïl 1∑nru1wo of accuracy or due care, will, aa heretofore, be found in our pas,,1.



COLLISION WITH THE VETOIS'l'S,
1, January, IS17, Mr. O'Connell gave every a..istancc In l1ls pcwer to an tbortiï aLtcmpt 1nnJe !n Dubllo to get up a aoclety of "Prlen,la of .Reform In Parliament." It wu com- 1,w,cd of l'rotestanta and Catholics, antl, thongh Ill numben were very limited, and It durKtlon did not extend beyond a few meetlnga and dlnner1, It  wu  10 far valuoble"" l,e,ng tl1e first occnslon llnce the Union, when lrlahmen of dlft'erwt creollla Md UIO<:latec c.,11 something Hke terms of equality in ontt- body.
  Early ln r,ïbruary occurred a colllolon with the vcto!ïts, orw oeeeden. "Prollt!ng by the g,'""'" ï1ïaLhJ we have mï tlrnïd AS pre•&!11Dg In tile 1ïnrul..l∑ mind, tl,11 mï..,ï:sble Utl'r


-	Digitized by Google

l>AS[EL o'oo:,NELL, ESQ., ll.P.	39
DOi"---to o.d Leen busy In the::- c.mall -..a.y, m11etlng, i;,<>r.chlfylng to each othor, ro.,,1hi11 md lilboarlr. with lnflnlt.e p&lna to  ahow the  minister  bow anxious they were to  aul>, r∑,., his ho,tU!ty to Irtah ecclealuUcal lnd pendenee, II he would on]• renew and carry ,,n tJ.111ttaclu; wtth his pristine ticUvlty
The following not.111catlon ftom them appeared In tho D11blln papers, at the end oi Jwmï
ary:-
  ï It!3 tl:o Intention of the gentlemen who have oalled the meeting of tbe 4th of Febniary ne:st, while they adhere atrlcUy to the principles contained In their petition of 1118t year

(ïi

._ the &0o.:edera' petition entrnlted to.Mr. Grattan>, to eYlnce, by the meaaiue which they

intend to prorc ll to he meeting, a deolre that the general feeling of the Roman Cathollo body ma11, a.r/<ir c, ,!>CJlibu, b4 alund<d lo I In any 'arrangements that may evontu u,≠ &ee ïmpany a bill ofrelieft.o\be Catholiea of Ireland.'"
l. Is amusing to note the coolneu wtth which this little knot of trlmmen &nrull!IICU
thelr gracious dealre to have ,ome colt9ideratlon for the opinions of the rest of Ireland. The meeUng .was advert!aed for the day aboye atated,  and to be held at No. 60, Ecoltl≠
,tr,tt.  Mr, O'Connell  and  the   leading  gentlemen of  tlie  popnlar  movement detennlnetl
that It ahonld not be one of a hole and comer description; and accordingly he, wtth se,∑c≠ ral of his colleaguea,.attended at the time and place named. They were stopped ln the hnl I by a servant boy, who showed them a resolution signed by Lord Southwell and Sir Edward Bellew, to Ibo ell'ect that the meeting wu con11ned to those who had been parties to aenrllng II Catholic petition to Mr. Grattan In the preceding year. But, as the public a,Jvortl"8ment had announced no such reaen,atlon, the7 refused to be bound by this prlntot arrangement, and acccrdlngly proceeded np ata!rs.
Slcholas Mahon ope1111d the battery on the utounded ntolsta usembled In scanty m,m ï
!>era up stairs. He said he attended  In the usertlon of  ilia  rtgbt  as a Catholic, to attend to what wao his Individual concern. as -.∑ell u that of the body at large, and therefore would rem11lo.
Lord Southwell ref8'l'ed to the tenna at thl notice In the hall, and "hoped entleme
would withdraw."
  Yr. O'Connell said, he for one w011ld eertalnly not do so.  He entirely denied the  right of any portion of the Catholic body to form themaolves Into a privileged cl&aa, or an Orunge lodge, ottt of which they could exclude any other Catholic looking for emancipation.
  Besldoa, be Mid, hi had come there that dayIn the perfect spirit of conclll&tlon, ant! to make proposltlona that might tend to combine the entire Catholic body fn one great exer. tlon. The proposlllona were so reasonable that nothing could reslat them, but a deterï minatlon to dissension, or for the veto.
  There was a long conault&tlon between Lord Scuthwell, Sir E. Bellew, and his brother. Counsellor Bellew. At J.aat Lord Southwell being moved to the chair,
  Sir Edward Bellew, dlacl&lmlng personal disrespect, moved to adjourn, as persons not tummoned were present. Mr, O'Connell opposed the motion, and after somo time, suc≠ eded ingetting the motion wtthclrawn.
  Sir Edward next moved twc resolutions drawn up by his brother: the one Cll.iling on llr. Grattan to move on their petition of the last year, and the other expressly recognizing tho right of the legislature to make ï 1&'11' conlrolHng 1M do´rlM and dilcipline q/ lhï CatJ.olio Church, bul pray(nq q/ ti.em Ml to bVHn dither.
  These resolution, were seconded by Randall H'Donnell, Esq., and opposed In stronr tenns.
l[r. O'Cllnnell next apoke. The following Is the newspaper extract,_ ivcn oy autho≠
rity :-
  "!Jc ftl'St pointed out the weaknea ilitd lmbecillty of the Catholic csuae Jlat year. whit't. he irnced to division and dlasensl011 in the Catholic body. This wu freely and fu!jy admlttod.	.
  "He then adverted to the '"""""'' by which the' aeceders∑ had last year justtled  the!: dhislon. First, 'tnt4mp,ranct!.' He aoserted that there w"" now nut ï 1bAdow of 111: n.ï l'<!r&nee. Tbll, too, WU adml ïd on all handa.

40	81CL1Cr.T SPEECHES OP
 "Secondly-ït,v """o4uetioR Qf Jlratn´Ji,1 ..,ï He ueerte4 that all ntn1:a,101J1 pieï had then been abandoned ; and thll allo was admitted..
∑ : Thirdly-ï lal(ftr, """' Iha pdititm ./NIii J/r. Gral'4n.' Thb polut he oll'ered to eo11- ceda. It collld eully bo done witho11t Interfering with the petltlou 111 Sir llonry Pamol1'9 hands. Another petition may bo lnltultly p:epw,,d to bo pvc  to Xr. Grattan, and l.llat 1-et1t1on Kr. O'Connell o´ored to sign, If It exclllded the veto
.. Fourthly-' Illï _,   o/,,,., OJ't!r ' f	,.,,..in u.. pdiUon, of IM
f'OOl'k' Even thla had been  obviated.  The  people  thle  year  had  adopted  a  petition already a\gned by Lord Fingal and Lord  Southwell, Sir  Edward  BeUew,  and  others.  And t!ley  had  actnally  given  up the  point of  aimple  Repeal,   by accedlDi to  the am:ngeruenL
,..hlch wu lhort of the veto-domestic nomination
 .'Th- were all the alleged cal18el or diaaenelon an4 division. Tho popular J)IU'tr hacl eonceded all, or were ready to concede all of them-and Mr. O'CORAOllflU'ther oß.,..td :
cl'll:t ""'  other	vhidi could produce ..,...,;m1:,-anythlng connected with an
upreued or Implied ueent to any vetolatlcal moasur,, alwaJ ï excepted.
  ïï He then called on the eeceden to eay, whet.her they would do "1lything, or  take auy one alep for nnanlmlty; and to thle queatlon, though pnt..repeaiedl;y, he could pt no
∑ epl;y.
  "He lutly ebowed, that befo"' tble meeting, there wu perfect unanimity; and If the """8dere did not, b;y now coming lurw&nl, take awa:r from the CMthotlc cauae the 1trengtb which unanimity would otl!erwlee give It, there waa, In the pre&ent atate of allaira, tb
,;reateet Ukellboocl of 111ccess, nnlell the cauae wu retarded and embllrraued by conlllct≠
lJlg pctltlona, and dlacordant peuttonen.
   Bo concluded b;r entreating. at all event?ï further deliberation, and an acljonrmnent f<JI tli1ee or roar daya, with the appointment of a committee, to consiat of Sir E. .Bellïw, Randal ll'Donnell, J&mea Connoll;y, and Nicholaa Mahon, Eaqrs., who oould meet In tl,e meantime from day to day, and conllider whether there were any mean? of recoucWns all i-art1ea In the Catholic body, and procllrins unanlmlt;y.
  "Hr. Jamea Conu.. ly propoaed, 111111 Couneellor Howler eocooded an IMIJoarnmelll nccordlngly, and Hr. R. M'Donnell .....,ted  toIt, aaylng that the meeting would cert..inly be lnexcneab'e with the country, if It did not, at leut, make an attempt at conciliation.
"The propoaltlon, however, wu ,....,_ by fourteen to four.  llr. O'Connell, Hr. 1dahon,
Ur. H'Laugblln (Comellue), Mr. O'Kelly, and the other popular Cathollca, were excluded from  the  ,-ole by the  Chairman, on the  ground  of their not being parties 1ummoned. 'lbe
,ninorlty were Heaara. H'Donn611, Connolly, Howley, and Phelan. The majorlt;y are deacrlbed aa eeven barrlatera, (or ï colllllellora'), of whom two were pensioner?ï ,1.z., Bellew and  L;ynch  (Sir Edward   Bellew), two penona  tolally  uuknown, and  three very ;young men
tqually unknown; ïand th.na 'contlnuea the report we have extracted from) wu totaUy rejected all affectation of 1".ahlng to strengthen the Catholic cauae b:r unanimlt;r, or ,,r e.>nceallng any longer the ardent cleaire for a veto,ï
  "Mr. O'Connell then rose and said, that he had done bla dnty. He had exerted ove'7 l'aculty of hla mind, and ever:r good feeling of hla h..art, to promote unanimlt;y. He hl&J taken away all pretext-all colour or lhadow of excnae from the few who had eet them≠ aelvea up In oppoaltlon to the Catholic bod;y, and hMd made them, by their own act, demoo- 1trate that they only IOlll!hl for dlaeen1ion and diatractiou, and that they bad no other ultimate object but to Increase tho corrupt lnlluence of thï mlnLatry, at the expenoe of tbe religion and llbe of Ireland I
  "He would no longer coneent to remain amOJ1g them; lint he v,ould annonr.ce to them t!Jla undoubted truth, that their puny elforta for a veto  were  pour  and  impotent,  and would be bluted by the voice of the Catholic cler117 and peopleof Ireland, whoee zealous, hone1t, and O'J1111CienuoD1 oppolitlon to that meaoure, only .ccumulated as the uttempt to betray them "ppeared more manifest. It wu rldlculous to expect 1ucceaa fur , hat mea.,w∑e, how 111ch mlaerable 1upport, agalnat the unlveraal voice of Ireland.
"llr. O'Connell and the Other gentlemen of the popular party then withdrew. '
A aep,.rate ïtatement of tliia alfalr wN. a few"")-. aftenl'llrdL pu, 1orward br Mr. Belleï










































































